We analyse Thobela Mfeti, senior research & investment analyst at Glacier by Sanlam. If someone came to you tomorrow with R100m to invest in just one company, which would it be? I don’t think I’d invest that amount of money in just one company. I’d look to diversify the money with a manager that I feel comfortable with. I’d therefore select either the PSG Equity Fund or the PSG Flexible Fund — these funds have both produced good returns for investors. The company has a strong philosophy and process, which it sticks to — even in tough times. Which talent would you most like to have? I’d like to be able to multi-task better. I have so many things that I’d like to do, including studies and travel. I wish I could "freeze" time to allow me to do everything I want to do. What was your first job? My first paying job was as a party planner at Bugz Playpark in Cape Town. In those days we still got paid cash in a brown envelope. After that  I got a more formal job at Truworths, also while still studying. What’s your biggest regret? I would have liked to pursue chartered accountancy but I wasn’t able to convert my degree so I studied finance instead. Your worst investment mistake? Buying the pound soon after Brexit happened, thinking it would go up. I need to stress that this is a hobby, I don’t deal in currencies for a living! What’s the best investment you’ve ever made? Time will tell, but last year I opened a tax-free savings account for my one-year-old daughter. I selected fairly risky assets due to the longer time horizon. Apple or Samsung? Samsung — it’s an open system that caters for a spectrum of functions and offers a lot of variety. It also has strong appeal as a brand. If you found a lottery ticket tomorrow that had won US$100m, what would you do? I’m a natural saver so I’d invest most of it. In these volatile and unpredictable times, I’d seek out an investment that provides certainty over the next five years, such as Glacier’s Capital Enhancer. With this solution, I get enhanced exposure to global equity markets without currency risk — and my capital is guaranteed. What’s your favourite song? I like India Arie, so would select either "Strength, Courage & Wisdom", or else "I Am Not My Hair". Your greatest extravagance? I bought two cakes from the Velvet Cake Co for my birthday. There really was no need for two cakes — I just spent a lot on cake in general that year! Name a place you’ve been to that lived up to the hype. Groningen, in the Netherlands — I spent some time there on an internship. It really is a student city and sometimes we partied all night. But there’s a balance — we worked hard too. On what occasions do you lie? I sugarcoat information for my young daughter until she’s old enough to understand context, and also to protect someone I care about.