Investors who bought shares in Brait this time last year must be feeling particularly pained. On June 13, the day the company issued results for the year to March, the share price closed at an almost three-year low of R62.51 — more than 50% off the heady levels at which it was trading 12 months ago. It has recovered a bit since then, but not by much. So what gives? Are Brait’s glory days gone or can it do another Pepkor? (In that deal, incidentally, Brait sold Pepkor to Steinhoff at seven times its cost price, earning a cool R26bn return.) Unfortunately, New Look, the UK retailer for which Brait paid £763m in June 2015 (about R14.2bn at the time), remains a problem child. When it bought the asset, Brait valued it at about R15bn. This was then ratcheted up to nearly R35bn at the end of March 2016, a peak from which it has tumbled to R7.1bn as at March 31 this year — less than it originally paid. From accounting for 45% of Brait’s investment portfolio a year ago, New Look today makes up 15%. Its spectacular decline in value helped knock Brait’s own net asset value (NAV)/share 42.6% lower to R78.15, down from R136.27 at the end of the previous period. In pound terms, Brait’s NAV/share is 27.9% lower, indicating the considerable effect a stronger rand has had on the company’s primary measure of value. Still, a decline in New Look’s earnings, coupled with a lower valuation multiple applied to the asset by Brait, had a greater effect. New Look’s full-year 2017 operational earnings fell 32% on a highly competitive UK retail environment, higher staff wages and increased investment into marketing initiatives and its China expansion. Since Brait, headed by John Gnodde, values its businesses based on their most recent earnings, it then decreased the valuation multiple it applied to New Look from 13.3 times at March 2016, a 12% discount to peers, to 10.3 times at March 2017, a 29% discount to the trailing three-year average multiple of peers. Brait increased the level of the discount to account for New Look’s underperformance on revenue and earnings relative to its peer group, a spokesman says. Shareholders shouldn’t hold their breath waiting for a quick turnaround. New Look expects the challenging retail environment in the UK to persist, but says it has improved its buying processes and supply chain to ensure it delivers what consumers want. "Immediacy and convenience matter more than ever before in the search for great fashion," says New Look CEO Anders Kristiansen. "We are renewing our determination to offer even more compelling lead-in entry prices across our ranges. By being faster on the latest trends and acting with added conviction, we will reduce reliance on promotions and discounting." Brait is careful to point out that New Look remains the second-largest UK womenswear retailer, with a share of 5.8%. It is also in the top five in the online womenswear market. Internationally, its sales increased by 15.4%, boosted by China, where the retailer added 25 stores over the period to take its footprint to 110. Whether Brait will successfully turn this business around remains to be seen. The share is trading at a discount to its NAV, which may make it considerably more attractive to investors, particularly those who have faith in 35% shareholder Christo Wiese and the company’s investment team. However, investors will find no similar inspiration from New Look’s bonds. On the heels of its results, prices on the retailer’s 2022 and 2023 notes fell to 77p and 63p in the pound respectively, with yields at 13% and 19%. "Clearly the bond market is concerned about whether New Look will be able to service its debt," says Renier de Bruyn, investment analyst at Sanlam Private Wealth. In September, New Look repurchased £23.3m of senior notes at a discount of £3.3m. The slide in the prices of its bonds offers further opportunity, either for New Look or Brait, to repurchase this debt at a discount, De Bruyn says. Brait has total cash and available facilities of about R7.3bn. Of course, the company will not be drawn on whether it plans to buy back any of New Look’s debt, saying only that the business’s cash-flow generation and available undrawn borrowing facilities are sufficient to fund operations and capital expenditure, and service interest on its debt package. New Look’s operating cash flow of £115.6m for the year to March is still comfortably above its interest payments of £80m for the period, De Bruyn says. He is more sceptical, however, of whether this will be sufficient to cover capital expenditure. "Unless New Look’s profitability improves, it may require additional funding to support its expansion plans into China." Mergence Investment Managers portfolio manager Bradley Preston says New Look’s net debt, at more than seven times higher than operational earnings, does not look tenable. "Brait’s share appears to be pricing in a possible equity capital raise," he says. But De Bruyn does not expect Brait to be required to inject more capital into New Look, provided its earnings don’t fall further. Brait certainly doesn’t look ready to walk away from this investment just yet. Still, considering the change to its value, investors would be wise to take a view on Brait’s other investments, which are now a proportionally larger part of its portfolio. These include Virgin Active, Premier and Iceland Foods. Premier has demonstrated resilience amid drought and weak economic growth conditions, with Iceland Foods indicating signs of an impressive turnaround. Virgin Active is now Brait’s single largest investment, accounting for 33% of the group’s R44.4bn NAV. While Virgin Active’s membership growth has been disappointing in SA, it has had good traction in Singapore and Thailand, says De Bruyn. It benefits from the fact that Virgin is an immediately recognisable global brand. With operations in Southern Africa, the UK, Europe and Asia Pacific, the gym chain is well diversified. And its member base in SA is largely affluent, which provides a level of resilience through economic cycles. New fitness fads, says Brait, are largely complementary to Virgin Active and help to grow the overall fitness market. Despite an increase in revenue and earnings for the year to December, Virgin Active trades at a discount to peers. Brait’s saving grace could be that it offers investors access to a basket of diverse, unlisted investments, such as this one. For this same reason, investors should be prepared to hold on for a bumpy ride.