Economists have split into two distinct camps: a minority group, which expects the Reserve Bank to cut interest rates this year, boosting the economy; and the majority, which foresees that rates will remain on hold and growth will be dismal. The catalyst for this split is the fact that consumer inflation is coming down faster than expected while the rand has remained remarkably resilient despite the cabinet reshuffle and SA’s downgrade to junk status. Headline CPI has undershot for the past two months in a row, forcing the Bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC) to lower its inflation forecast at its meeting last week. It now expects CPI to average 5.7% in 2017 (compared with 5.9% previously), helped largely by slowing food inflation, weak domestic demand, a relatively strong rand and favourable base effects. Even without falling food prices, inflation is subdued. Core inflation (CPI excluding food, fuel and electricity) moved lower again to 4.8% in the year to April 2017, almost back to the mid-point of the inflation target band. But the Bank’s CPI forecast for 2018 and 2019 still remains broadly unchanged at 5.3% in 2018 and 5.5% in 2019. As expected, the Bank kept the repo rate on hold at 7% last week, citing the currency as a "key upside risk" to the inflation outlook given the potential for further sovereign credit downgrades and changes in global risk sentiment towards emerging markets. Only one member of the MPC voted to cut rates. Among the more bullish forecasters is the Old Mutual Investment Group. It is expecting three interest rate cuts in total — one before the end of 2017 and two more in 2018. This rests on the expectation that inflation will dip below 5% by July. "Over the shorter term the SA economy is not looking as bad as we thought," says Old Mutual senior economist Johann Els. "[It is] being propped up by a more supportive global economic environment, as well as the better agricultural output following the sharply increased summer crops that are expected. "This backdrop makes it difficult for SA’s economy to slump. We are therefore likely to see a mild growth recovery locally, with consumers buoyed by lower inflation [and] interest rates and increasing wages." John Ashbourne of Capital Economics has a similar view. He is confident that the economy will bounce back to 2% real GDP growth this year, helped to a large degree by an expected 30% rise in agricultural output. This will feed through into stronger consumer spending by boosting rural incomes and reducing national inflation (see graph). It should add 0.6 percentage points to SA’s overall growth rate. Ashbourne explains that last year’s GDP collapse was driven largely by a one-off supply shock: the worst drought in living memory. This acted as a drag on overall GDP, pushed up inflation and dampened consumer spending. The other big culprit was weakening domestic demand. This was partly a result of the lagged effects of the MPC’s rate-hiking cycle and also because fixed investment contracted in both the private and the public sectors, the former because of a lack of business confidence and the latter due to fiscal austerity. But because the economy grew at only 0.3% last year, this has opened up an output gap equal to roughly 1.5% of potential GDP, Ashbourne estimates. This creates scope for a short period of above-trend growth over the coming year driven by the rebound in agriculture and, hopefully, looser monetary policy. Ashbourne expects the Bank to cut rates by a cumulative 50 basis points during the final two quarters of this year and once more in 2018, taking the repo to 6.25% by the end of next year. "Opinion seems to be shifting our way," he says, noting that while the consensus remains that interest rates will be left on hold in 2017, the number of analysts expecting a rate cut has risen from three to five over the past month. And while four analysts still expected a hike when they were polled in April, none do now. Though pressure for a rate cut is certainly building, Nomura and Stanlib are among the majority who don’t expect the Bank to budge any time soon. Normally, if inflation surprises consistently on the downside at a time when the economy is practically in recession, the overwhelming expectation is for the Bank to cut rates to ease pressure on households and firms. However, the Bank has to balance this against the fact that lower interest rates would reduce the yield-attraction of the rand and thereby increase SA’s vulnerability to changes in foreign capital flows, explains Stanlib chief economist Kevin Lings. "SA remains extremely vulnerable to changes in global investor sentiment, which is aggravated by the country’s recent credit rating downgrades as well as the expectation that the US Fed will continue to normalise interest rates." Bank governor Lesetja Kganyago has spelt out exactly what would have to transpire for rate cuts to occur: inflation must continue to surprise on the downside and the Bank’s inflation forecast must be sustainably within the target range until the end of 2019. It probably means that the Bank’s 2018 and 2019 average inflation forecast will have to fall from 5.3% and 5.5% respectively to 5% or lower at the coming MPC meetings. This is starting to look quite plausible, given the rate at which food prices are coming down. However, Kganyago tempers any optimism for rate cuts by adding: "In the current environment of high levels of uncertainty, the risks to the outlook could easily deteriorate and derail the current favourable assessment." In other words, while cuts are possible in the current framework, nothing is guaranteed — a sharp currency depreciation (which would feed through to higher inflation) could push rate cuts clean off the table. This is certainly Nomura strategist Peter Attard Montalto’s interpretation of the Bank’s communication. He feels the MPC statement should be read together with Kganyago’s "almost evangelical" emphasis after the MPC meeting that the market should shift its focus from the favourable short-term CPI releases to the medium term, as monetary policy has an influence 18 months out. Kganyago’s point is that while the short-term CPI forecast has improved, it remains virtually unchanged for 2018 and 2019, where it stays "uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target range". This gives the Bank "very little headroom to absorb the impact of possible adverse shocks," Kganyago says. "The next few interest rate decisions by the MPC are not going to be easy and the rate outcome will probably remain a close call," says Lings. But on balance both he and Attard Montalto still expect the Bank to leave rates unchanged in the short to medium term.