We analyse Ringetani Ndlovu, investment analyst at Futuregrowth. If someone came to you tomorrow with R100m to invest in just one company, which would it be? I don’t think I could bring myself to park R100m in a single company. Diversity is one of the best risk-mitigation tools. My inclination would be to invest in a diversified fund holding a variety of developmental infrastructure assets — for example, education, health care, transport and energy. These kinds of assets can provide risk-adjusted returns while improving the world we live in. Which talent would you most like to have? A photographic memory. The ability to recall large amounts of information buried somewhere in memory would be useful in my professional life. The downside would be the inability to forget any cringeworthy embarrassing moments! What was your first job? My first job out of university was my articles at KPMG. What’s your biggest regret? Being a bit too risk-averse and overly conservative. I’ve since realised that making mistakes is a key aspect of learning, and "analysis paralysis" can inhibit growth. Your worst investment mistake? Not getting my foot on the Cape Town property ladder pre-2010. Urban renewal and investment in the CBD and surrounds has led to residential property prices soaring over the past few years. As a result, the likelihood of finding an appropriately priced buy-to-let is near-impossible. What’s the best investment you’ve ever made? Investing in personal relationships has been an excellent investment of time and energy. My family and friends have been my greatest supporters and encouragers. Building strong relationships in my professional life has also presented opportunities for continuous growth and development. All these relationships have yielded positive returns in my life. Apple or Samsung? Apple, though I do miss my old Nokia 3310 with its week-long battery life. If you found a lottery ticket tomorrow that had won US$100m, what would you do? The first thing would be to go on an extended globetrotting holiday with my husband. A portion would be set aside to fund an education trust for underprivileged young African women. The rest I would invest in a diversified growth portfolio. What’s your favourite song? Let’s Stay Together, by Al Green. This song evokes such happy memories. My husband and I chose this song for our first dance at our wedding. Your greatest extravagance? I love books. My mother instilled a love of reading in me from a young age and as a result I can’t walk out of a bookstore without a new purchase. Name a place you’ve been to that lived up to the hype. Buenos Aires! The city has a unique balance of old-world beauty and edgy grittiness. On what occasions do you lie? I try not to lie — life is much easier when you don’t have to keep track of stories.