The funding recipe at fast-food brands conglomerate Taste Holdings will be tested in the next few years as the roll-out of Starbucks gains momentum. Taste’s growth strategy is largely pinned on the roll-out of the iconic coffee brand and pizza outlet Domino’s. The initial funding for the accelerated roll-out of Starbucks — it has four stores — will come from the proposed sale of Taste’s jewellery retail businesses. But this process has only just got under way, and it may be months before Taste can secure an acceptable price on NWJ Fine Jewellery (acquired for R120m in 2008) and Arthur Kaplan (acquired for about R90m in 2014). However, in the interim, fresh capital of R120m will be raised through a claw-back offer. This is the fourth time Taste has tapped investors for fresh funding in the past three years, having raised R180m in a rights issue in August 2014, R95m in a specific share issue in April 2015 and R226m in a rights offer in September 2015. In the year to end-February, the start-up and redevelopment costs for Starbucks and Domino’s burnt through Taste’s cash pile. The group kicked off the financial year with more than R170m cash in hand — but finished the year R15m in overdraft. The critical question now is what price tag Taste can dangle on the jewellery businesses, which hiked revenue 9% to R622m but took some strain on margins, with operating profits pegged at R53m. This is not the best time in the economic cycle to be selling top-end retail businesses. Taste CEO Carlo Gonzaga concedes that shareholders should not expect Taste to extract top dollar for these assets. Market watchers reckon a collective price tag of between R350m and R400m would be considered reasonable. While the food division stretched its losses to an ominous R144m off revenue of R551m, Taste’s just-released annual report stressed that supply chain, executive expertise and staff training programmes were all in place. Gonzaga says these must now be leveraged to ensure the profitability of a possible long-term outlay of 300 corporate-owned Domino’s Pizza outlets and 150 Starbucks stores in SA. The short-term roll-out for Starbucks will be measured, with eight to 10 new stores opening this financial year, and a drive-thru format coming on stream. The target for 2020 is between 30 and 45 stores. Starbucks stores cost between R5m and R8m to open. Taste pencils in its monthly store sales at between R1m and R1.5m for a return on investment of 30%-50%. Gonzaga says the first three Starbucks stores are trading well ahead of original forecasts. The fourth store only opened in April. But Gonzaga’s comments are still tinged with caution. "While we are still on track to achieve a core earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation break-even in our Starbucks business by the fifth store — a remarkable achievement in itself — we acknowledge that our short-term earnings will remain under pressure as we invest in the additional outlets that will secure Taste’s long-term future." Taste also owns a basket of other fast-food brands, including Zebro’s, the Fish & Chip Co and Maxi’s. Whether it would consider putting these smaller brands up for sale remains to be seen.