If SA’s claim before the UN to expand its exclusive economic zone (EEZ) is successful, its ocean holdings will be almost three times the size of the country itself. The application is for the EEZ — which, at more than 1.5mkm², is already bigger than our 1.06mkm² mainland area —  to be increased by 1.87mkm². Environmental affairs minister Edna Molewa projects that our sea will create 1m jobs and add US$10bn to SA’s GDP by 2033. But the expansion will bring with it a maritime security headache to match the economic promise of more than doubled seabed fishing and hydrocarbons exploration rights. A conference at the Security Institute for Governance & Leadership in Africa (Sigla) in Stellenbosch in May was asked whether SA would need a coast guard to patrol such extensive waters to prevent illegal crustacean fishing, waste-dumping and other criminal activities. Though the navy will gain three offshore patrol vessels by about 2022, will these ships be mandated to deal with illegal, unregulated and unmonitored fishing and have fisheries control officers on board? A dedicated coast guard could deal with all forms of maritime crime in addition to fish stock and pollution monitoring, and search-and-rescue operations. But the defence ministry is leaning towards surveillance aircraft and other long-range tracking instruments to monitor the possibly expanded EEZ. Maritime surveillance drones and satellites are an even surer bet. The 2016 WWF report on SA fisheries states a processed value of R1.09m/year for the illegal abalone catch in the current EEZ. SA scholar Jonny Steinberg noted previously that this catch is bartered by Cape and Chinese gangs for Mandrax from Southeast Asia, thereby integrating illicit fishing with the activities of transnational crime syndicates. So it makes sense, the Sigla conference heard, to take a multi-agency approach that would include navy, police, customs, fisheries and environmental officers. SA’s present EEZ combines a 200 nautical mile reach beyond its coastline with a radius of a similar length around its tiny South Atlantic possessions, the Prince Edward Islands. Its claim, initiated by Petroleum Agency SA (Pasa) in 2005 with an initial budget of R23m and submitted to the UN in 2009, would make the two zones contiguous. A joint claim with France, centred on its Crozet Islands, which are halfway between Madagascar and the coast of Antarctica, will give the two maritime powers their first mutual border if successful. It will divide in half the Discovery Ridge, a huge undersea mountain range larger than the Drakensberg that extends from the Prince Edward and Crozet Islands in the direction of Madagascar, to which SA will also become a neighbour. Pasa expects the UN to endorse the joint claim. The rights, if green-lighted by the UN, are limited to mineral and living resources on and under the seafloor. Unlike the current EEZ, it excludes fish in the water, but includes oil and gas, phosphates, manganese, possibly diamonds and precious metals, crustacean and seabed life, and the gold-bearing hydrothermal deposits near the Prince Edward Islands. Pasa notes:  "The most tangible resource could be the robust microbes that live in the freezing cold and darkness of the ocean floor and also in the boiling hot and toxic underwater geysers that occur on the Southwest Indian Ridge near the Prince Edward Islands. These are increasingly being used to develop new-generation medical drugs." Jeremy Marillier, executive director of commercial fishing umbrella Fish SA, says that though the expanded EEZ promises extensive untapped seabed wealth — including the potential discovery of exploitable new seafloor species — there is still an enormous amount of hydrographic, hydrocarbon and bottom-dwelling biology survey work to be done to establish the commercial viability of these underexplored regions. At least this will create more scientific jobs, as well as lower-end employment, though he says it’s unlikely to ensure food security for coastal communities. The Nigerian and Somali experiences have shown that impoverished seashore communities often turn to maritime crime. Marillier warns that the current marine spatial planning draft framework of the environmental affairs department is piecemeal, was drafted without industry input, and is inadequate to address the extension of patrolling, monitoring, and compliance obligations an extended EEZ will bring with it.