We question Deanne Chatterton, CEO of Instinctif Partners Africa. What’s the most interesting thing about you that people don’t know? I took ballet lessons for 13 years. What is your biggest regret? I don’t believe in regrets. I believe that we make decisions with the information we have at that time. Sometimes it works out, sometimes it doesn’t. But life is too short to focus on the what ifs. If we do, we stand the chance of missing out on the next great opportunity. Which living person do you most admire? Malala Yousafzai — what extraordinary courage and humility she portrays at her age as she continues her journey as a young education advocate despite the horrors she has experienced. What was your first job? I was a waitress at RJ’s steakhouse. I had to earn my pocket money while I was studying at university. What are you reading at the moment? Silent Thunder: In the Presence of Elephants by Katy Payne. It is incredibly insightful to understand the power of communication that exists between these majestic creatures who could soon be extinct if we do not protect them. What’s your biggest indulgence? French champagne. Which phrase or word do you most overuse? Just now. Tell us about a hidden gem in Jo’burg/Cape Town/Durban that not many people know about? Paul’s bakery in Melrose Arch — decadent. How do you handle stress? What are your top tips for dealing with stress? I run to manage my stress level. It is my time alone with my thoughts and the road ahead. Who is your favourite hero of fiction? Wonder Woman, of course. What’s the worst airport you’ve been in? Beijing airport. What’s your one top tip for doing a deal? Do your homework, understand the deal and its parameters, do your due diligence, know your price and have the courage to walk away if the deal is not going to work to your benefit. What is the one investment you wish you had made, or made earlier? Travelling to different countries, being exposed to different cultures. We all have so much to learn about one other. On what occasions do you lie? When I am asked how much I spent at Zara ... Not a lot. Nominate your eighth wonder of the world. Eating ice cream in Florence should be classified as the eighth wonder of the world. It is out of this world. What do you consider the most overrated virtue? I would consider beauty the most overrated virtue. We need so much more tolerance, patience and acceptance in our society.