Following its unbundling by Mondi in July 2011 Mpact could seemingly not put a foot wrong as it went on to double its headline EPS (HEPS) in its first three years as a listed company. Then the wheels started to come off. The paper and plastics packaging group was struck by an avalanche of problems in its year to December 2016, including steeply rising input costs, flagging demand and start-up problems at a new PET plastics recycling plant. The difficulties sent Mpact’s HEPS diving by a third, and precipitated a 25% cut in its final dividend. The rot worsened in the company’s latest six months to June, with the group reporting a further 64% slump in HEPS to 34c/share and a halving of its interim dividend. Mpact’s management has done what it could to address challenges, most notably resolving the problem of insufficient grinding capacity at its PET recycling plant and limiting fixed costs to a 4.9% rise. But its biggest problem, soaring costs of paper for recycling, is largely outside the control of management, even one as competent as Mpact’s. To keep the wheels of its containerboard and cartonboard plants rolling, Mpact consumes over 620,000t/year of scrap paper, or as it is more accurately referred to, old container cartons (OCC). High OCC costs have already done serious damage to the profitability of Mpact’s paper division, which normally accounts for about 75% of group revenue and 85% of operating profit. In the latest six months the division’s operating profit margin halved from 9.6% one year earlier to 4.8%, and its operating profit dropped 39% to R177m. "Over the past 12 months the OCC price has jumped 58% in [US] dollars and about 35% in rand terms," says Mpact CEO Bruce Strong. OCC makes up half of Mpact’s total variable costs. Underlying the soaring OCC price is an impending ban by China’s government on the import of contaminated OCC and other scrap materials such as PET. It has a genuine reason for concern. In a submission to the WTO it noted: "We found large amounts of dirty wastes or even hazardous wastes mixed in the solid waste that can be used as raw materials. This pollutes China’s environment seriously." That the ban on dirty waste will come appears virtually inevitable and will leave other countries competing for the supply of clean OCC to China. According to the US Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries (ISRI) China is the world’s biggest importer of OCC, with its annual demand running at over 13.2Mt. It has prompted the ISRI to warn: "A ban on imports of scrap commodities to China would be catastrophic to the global recycling industry." It comes as very bad news for Mpact at a time when it faces growing competition from three significant unlisted rivals: Golden Era, Corruseal and Neopak. With Mpact’s completion of the final phase of its Felixton paper mill’s R765m upgrade during the second half of 2017 the company will also be looking for buyers of an additional 60,000t of annual capacity. It is not only Mpact’s paper division that has hit hard times. The plastics division’s results went into a nosedive in the six months to June, with a 5% decrease in sales volume and an 8.5% drop in revenue at R1.2bn. It left operating profit 61% down at R27m. The profit fall came despite a R20m reduction in the loss from the division’s PET recycling operation, Mpact Polymers. The plant was SA’s first PET recycling venture. It was built at a cost of R350m and commissioned in July 2015. The venture has Coca-Cola as its anchor customer. Despite significant start-up problems that caused Mpact Polymers to run up an operating loss of R87m in 2016, Strong is upbeat on longer-term prospects. "I believe that in recycled PET we have a huge commercial opportunity," he says. But for now Mpact Polymers is a small-scale operation. Its annual capacity of 21,000t is dwarfed by KAP’s PET manufacturing division Hosaf, which, after completion of an expansion project in September, will have an annual capacity of 240,000t. With Mpact facing ongoing weak demand and high OCC input costs Strong holds out scant hope of a better second six months. Evan Walker of 36One Asset Management is just as gloomy on prospects for 2018. "At best Mpact will earn 60c/share next year," he says. This would be a far cry from the 367c/share earnings Mpact delivered in 2015. With its share price trading at R27 this leaves it looking heavily overvalued. thomass@fm.co.za