We analyse Amrish Narrandes, investment analyst at Futuregrowth. If someone came to you tomorrow with R100m to invest in just one company, which would it be? Google holding company Alphabet. In my view, Google is a technology real estate investment trust that is constantly innovating. Which talent would you most like to have? Given the unlimited access to information we have today with the Internet, I’d love to be able to read about 10,000 words a minute and retain what I’ve read. What was your first job? Working in the family business. It entailed everything from packing shelves with inventory to being a cashier. What’s your biggest regret? My dad always says the real regrets in life are the risks you didn’t take. I try to live life in such a way that I don’t have many regrets. If things don’t go right, I put it down to experience gained and move on. Your worst investment mistake? Blue Financial Services. There were lots of hard lessons learnt that now form the basis of my investment checklist. What’s the best investment you’ve ever made? In the unlisted space, my brother and I have both found success setting up and exiting various start-ups. In the listed space, my best investment would be Capitec and Santova. Apple or Samsung? Ex-Apple. I’m currently using a Xiaomi phone. Android all the way — and definitely a company worth keeping an eye on (should it list). If you found a lottery ticket tomorrow that had won US$100m, what would you do? Given that I already tap dance to work, I guess I’ll use it as further seed funding to start my private equity fund. What’s your favourite song? A remix of Lady Soul by the Temptations and Oskido’s Tribal Blast. Amazing memories. What is your greatest extravagance? Sneakers and watches — I’m an avid collector. Name a place you’ve been to that lived up to the hype. New York City — the city that never sleeps. I feel alive as soon as I touch down at JFK International Airport. On what occasions do you lie? I guess every time I have that chocolate when I’m working late, saying it won’t make such a big difference on the scale. If you could fix one thing in SA today, what would it be? This is an easy one — I’d fix corruption and, in doing so, I’m certain unemployment would be reduced.