Resilience in tough times has always been Italtile’s hallmark. The R3.7bn annual revenue group is now pulling out the stops to defend its 45% share of SA’s tile market in an environment presenting unprecedented challenges. "Market conditions are even tougher than they were during 2008 and 2009," says Jan Potgieter, Italtile’s CEO since December. Italtile, which serves the market through its high-end Italtile, midmarket CTM and lower-end TopT brands, faces multiple challenges. Not least of these is the financial stress being experienced by middle-income consumers served by its core CTM division. "CTM is our biggest challenge," says Potgieter. "We have made big management changes in the division." Italtile faced another serious challenge in its past year to June. Caught off guard by a slump in demand that set in in its second quarter, the group found itself heavily overstocked. It was a market-wide problem worsened by the rand strengthening, which triggered a flood of imports from its competitors. Italtile went in wielding a big axe, cutting stocks by R213m (28%) in its second six months. This enabled it to lift cash on its ungeared balance sheet to R511m. "[The company] did an excellent job cutting stocks," says Warren Jervis of Old Mutual Investment Group. But Italtile’s response to tough conditions did not stop there. "We are also focused on overheads, and lowered them by 7% in the past year," says Potgieter. Italtile has other weapons in its armoury. Of these, the most powerful is its TopT brand, which targets what remains an underserved lower-income market. "Consumers in the lower-income groups never stop investing in their homes," says Potgieter. "TopT is taking massive market share." TopT offers what Italtile CFO Brandon Wood terms "a massive opportunity". The group has aggressively exploited this, opening 14 TopT stores in its past year. This took TopT’s lineup to 64 stores, just short of the 69 CTM stores in SA. Another of Italtile’s key weapons is its alliance with SA’s largest tile manufacturer, Ceramic Industries, in which it has held a 20% stake since 2012. Ceramic supplies about 80% of CTM and TopT’s tile requirements, says Potgieter. Ceramic also supplies Italtile with an important competitive advantage: speed to market in what is very much a fashion game. Potgieter says consumers are increasingly turning to online resources to do their preshopping research. In turn, this drives those seeking the latest fashion products to demand instant gratification. Ceramic’s ultra-modern Gryphon plant in Vereeniging, completed in late 2015, enables Italtile to provide just that. "Gryphon’s state-of-the-art inkjet printing technology has been a game changer," says Potgieter. "Tiles produced at Gryphon are a massive success for us." For good reason, Italtile’s goal is to take its relationship with Ceramic from alliance to control. To this end, in April 2016 it proposed upping its stake in the tile manufacturer to 93.5% in a R3.61bn deal, with half of this funded through a rights issue. The proposed deal was shot down by the competition commission in July 2016 and was subsequently the subject of a number of hearings by the competition tribunal, which on August 22 finally gave the deal unspecified conditional approval. "Italtile is getting a superb asset in Ceramic," says Jervis. Tough conditions resulted in Italtile’s headline EPS (HEPS) sinking 1.4% in its past year to 85.7c. The damage was done in the second half, with a first-half 7% HEPS rise reversed into a 7.4% decline in the second half. The company did well to hold the second-half fall to 7.4% against the background of a 9% fall in revenue. The second-half decline was limited by a rise in gross profit margin from 41.2% to 44.4%, says Daniel Isaacs, an analyst at 36One Asset Management. Italtile is not the only player in the building supplies sector that is taking strain. Massmart’s Massbuild division turned in a 5% sales volume fall in the 26 weeks to June 25. Cashbuild is faring somewhat better, but is far from booming. Revenue in its year to June (excluding a contribution from P&L Hardware, acquired in June 2016) was up 2%, while volume rose 1%. Isaacs is looking to Italtile to hold the line in its year to June 2018 and predicts that HEPS will remain flat. The acquisition of Ceramic could add up to an additional 10c/share, he says. However, he warns that if Italtile’s gross profit margin slips, it could be "in a lot of trouble". Italtile’s share price has held firm, coming off only 6% from its August 2016 high and leaving it trading on a 14.8 p:e. It’s no bargain, but for investors wanting exposure to a high-quality retailer, it is a share worth considering on price weakness.