We question Arthur Goldstuck, MD of World Wide Worx and editor-in-chief of Gadget. What’s the most interesting thing about you that people don’t know? I have a large collection of comics-related and movie-related die-cast metal cars in 1/44th scale. The original Corgi Batmobile is the pride of my collection. What is your biggest regret? That school never taught me about how the world works; that I never learnt accounting, which is like a secret language of business; or coding, which really is the secret language of technology; or how to read music, the ultimate secret language. What’s your one top tip for doing a deal? They must want it more than you do. Tell us about a hidden gem in SA that not many people know about. Delta Park, the green lung of Johannesburg. What was your first job? During school holidays, working in my father’s general dealer store because it wasn’t doing well enough to employ adult staff. What are you reading at the moment? The Shining Girls by Lauren Beukes. What’s your biggest indulgence? Single malt whisky and honey fudge. Watching football, as in soccer. What or who is the greatest love of your life? My daughters, Jayna and Zianda What do you consider the most overrated virtue? Obedience. Much of historical and modern tragedy is a consequence of blind obedience to authority, whether in politics, religion or business. Who is your favourite hero of fiction? It’s a tie between the character Death in Terry Pratchett’s Discworld series, DC’s Batman and Wonder Woman, and Marvel’s Wolverine. What’s the worst airport you’ve been in? JFK, relative to what it should be. For the major entry point to the world’s biggest economy, it is a dismal anti-climax. What is the one investment you wish you had made, or made earlier? Apple shares when they were US$18. I was dissuaded by the investment advisers of a relative through whom I wanted to buy them. Nominate your eighth wonder of the world. Street art, and the fact that some of the most magnificent public art produced globally is utterly ignored by millions of people walking past it every day. On what occasion do you lie? To protect people from themselves. How do you deal with stress? What are your top tips in handling stress? Go for a walk. Top tip: look at the world around you and recognise how miraculous it is.