We analyse Naeem Tilly, finance director and listed property analyst at Avior Capital Markets. If someone came to you tomorrow with R100m to invest in just one company, which would it be? MAS Real Estate. I am a firm believer in the company’s strategy to invest in Central and Eastern Europe. MAS has partnered with Prime Kapital, the management of which has an excellent track record at New Europe Property Investments. Funding costs remain low and are supportive of acquisitions and developments, and economic growth in many parts of Eastern Europe is strong. Which talent would you most like to have? The ability to do stand-up comedy. I think there is something special in making complete strangers laugh. What was your first job? I was 13 years old when I started selling shoes at a local flea market on weekends, working for my friend’s father. While the pay barely covered lunch, I got to spend time with my best mate. If you could turn back time, what would you change in your life? I would read more, both fiction and nonfiction. I wasted far too much time watching TV and playing video games. A Song of Ice and Fire author George RR Martin says: "A reader lives a thousand lives before he dies. The man who never reads lives only one." What’s the best investment you’ve ever made? In 2010 I bought Life Healthcare at R1.30 and sold at R3.50 two years later, achieving an annualised return of 66%. How much was your first pay cheque and what did you do with it? At my first full-time job, I earned R3,000 as an audit clerk. Most of it was used to pay my car instalment and petrol. There was unfortunately nothing left of it. What’s your favourite song? I don’t listen to much music, but I grew up listening to Michael Jackson and enjoyed Linkin Park during my time at varsity. "In the End" was probably my favourite. What is your greatest extravagance? Against all financial sense, I bought a sports car about five years ago. After meeting with an accident and realising how much value I’d lost, I vowed never to overspend on a car again. Name a place you’ve been to that lived up to the hype. Istanbul. It has centuries of history, from the Greeks to the Romans to the Ottomans. The architecture is stunning and the food is delicious. On what occasions do you lie? To save a life. What was your last purchase? Diapers for my 15-month-old son. I have perfected the art of diaper-changing. If you found a lottery ticket tomorrow that had won US$100m, what would you do with it? Try to find the rightful owner. If that didn’t work out, I would (reluctantly) give it all to charity.