In mid-July, CEOs of platinum companies in the Platinum Leadership Forum met mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane behind closed doors. It sparked fears that they were there to warn of more retrenchments to come. But Northam CEO Paul Dunne says the CEOs wanted to ensure that Zwane understood the difficulties the industry was experiencing and were "forthright" in making their case. It’s a long list. Besides persistently weak platinum prices and a strong rand (now R13.36 to the dollar against R16-plus just 18 months ago), mines face rising uncontrollable costs (such as power), regulatory uncertainty around the Mining Charter and long-delayed amendments to the Mineral & Petroleum Resources Development Act (MPRDA). There are also costly disruptions in the workplace from Section 54 safety stoppages and labour and community protests. "It was a positive meeting," says Anglo American Platinum (Amplats) CEO Chris Griffith. "We talked about what government, industry and labour can do. For example, we have been working for some time to persuade government to adopt a platinum Krugerrand. Through the World Platinum Investment Council we have achieved one in Austria and are working on a platinum Eagle in the US and platinum coins in the UK." Griffith says the CEOs also believe there is a case for the Reserve Bank to hold platinum as part of its reserve currency. "We feel the minister should be knocking on the door of treasury to make the case for the sake of the platinum industry," he says. The CEOs want regulators to ensure the platinum loading in autocatalysts is hiked, as SA is still on the Euro 2 standard. At the same time, Joseph Mathunjwa, president of the Association of Mineworkers & Construction Union (Amcu), is planning to march to the Union Buildings to demand that government change trade agreements that let mining firms effectively export jobs by allowing them to use money generated in SA to buy offshore assets. If local capital were used to build local industries, he says, it would be more focused on creating local capacity. Mathunjwa is urging government to review the licensing provisions in the MPRDA to make SA a more attractive investment destination. While the industry’s three biggest platinum miners — Amplats, Impala Platinum and Sibanye Gold — are holding their heads above water, some of the smaller producers, such as Atlatsa at its Bokoni mine, Platinum Group Metals at Maseve and Royal Bafokeng Platinum at Bafokeng Rasimone Platinum Mine recently announced they would have to restructure operations and retrench staff. Implats recently cut 800 jobs at its Marula operation. Kagiso Asset Management’s head of research, Abdul Davids, says there are likely to be more retrenchments in the industry as persistently low platinum group metals (PGM) prices and high operating cost inflation (especially wage growth) mean 70% of the industry is loss making — an unsustainably high number. The labour-intensive mines are under the highest pressure and there is an increasing profitability gap between them and the lower-cost mechanised mines, which have actually done well operationally. The latest financial reports from the platinum mines are mixed. Amplats, the world’s biggest platinum miner, grew cash from operations 3% to R6.7bn in the six months to June compared to last year as total PGM output rose 4%; Royal Bafokeng Platinum’s cash from operations dropped 68% to R122m as PGM production rose 9.4%. A clearer picture will emerge in the next few weeks, as Implats, Sibanye Gold and Northam publish their results. Lonmin’s shares soared 44% in two days, after it announced a strong performance for the three months to June. It mined more tons, which brought down its per-unit costs. The news also allayed fears that Lonmin may have to approach shareholders for more cash in another rights issue. While it seems a positive move, it doesn’t mask the fact that Lonmin’s stock is 96% below what it was three years ago. Lonmin has now said it will take further steps towards sustainability, including selling assets and cutting fixed costs. It will sell excess processing capacity, bring in joint-venture partners at certain operations and cut annual overheads by at least R500m by end-September 2018. Lonmin CEO Ben Magara refused to be drawn on whether the restructuring would involve job cuts, saying this is a matter for negotiations with the unions. Some of the savings will come from shifting the head office from Melrose Arch to Marikana and from doing other things differently. He says Lonmin has to reach a production level that can sustain the business. It holds regular sessions with Amcu to share its plans and make sure there is a common view of Lonmin’s future. Job cuts are naturally highly politically sensitive. When Amplats said it wanted to cut 14,000 jobs in 2013, government applied pressure and Amplats reduced this number to just 474 forcible retrenchments. "Government has to recognise that for the long-term health of the industry, high-cost producers must be allowed to exercise their commercial rights to restructure efficiently," says Davids. "The negative social and labour consequences from a big-bang corporate failure due to persistent cash burn will be far worse than that of properly managed restructuring projects." Davids says the industry’s productivity has been falling for years, due to increasing mining depth and a greater focus on worker safety, which has brought down fatalities. One option for labour-intensive mining companies would be to re-arrange shift cycles to increase the effective number of days actually worked. In SA, mines work 274 days a year — elsewhere, it is 365. Over time, Kagiso expects there will be a natural evolution from labour-intensive mining towards more mechanised mining. This will reduce costs and boost productivity. Mathunjwa dismisses the suggestion that high wage settlements following the five-month strike in 2014 are a factor in retrenchments. He says companies spend millions on underground machinery but cannot pay decent salaries to people working the machines. Corporate mind-sets need to change to see people as a resource, not a cost, he says. Though labour relations seem to have stabilised compared with 2012 and 2014, when Amcu was challenging the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) for membership in the platinum belt, the NUM said recently that it intends to launch a campaign to claw back its lost members. Mathunjwa says he is not concerned, describing it as an "act of desperation". "The platinum sector is fertile ground for any political party but Amcu has travelled too long a road with platinum workers to feel threatened by other unions," he says. There is another problem — community protests, which have disrupted operations and destroyed property around Rustenburg and Steelpoort. This also adds to miners’ costs. Platinum mines experience more community protests than other mining companies because they are located in the poorest parts of SA — the former homelands — where unemployment and poverty are rife, Magara says. In May, Lonmin’s Marikana operations were affected by a protest by the Bapong community demanding jobs, and in July the road to Wesizwe’s Bakubung mine was closed by protesters. Patrice Motsepe, CEO of African Rainbow Minerals (ARM), said in March he would not bow to highly politicised demands from communities around ARM’s Modikwa mine, near Steelpoort. Magara says no single company can address the problem of unemployment. But he adds that if the mines can’t operate due to community protests, more jobs will be lost. It is not only communities that feel excluded from the benefits of mining — shareholders have invested about R30bn in the industry in the past few years and received no dividends in return. Over the past three years, the Amplats share price tumbled 29%; Implats fell by 65% and Royal Bafokeng by 58% of its value. Over that time, the wider JSE all-share index climbed 9%. Though there has been some restructuring and consolidation in the industry, Davids says the key issue is that "persistent producer optimism is causing persistently low prices". This has led miners to believe the recovery is "just around the corner", preventing them from doing what’s necessary to restructure loss-making shafts. "This creates the unusual situation where a highly concentrated market faces a prolonged period of low prices for its product," he says. The solution, he says, is for PGM mining companies to plan for prices that remain lower for longer, making their decisions on how to allocate capital based on current spot prices. Since 2008, producers have slashed their capital investment significantly and the effects of that should be seen in gradually declining mine supply over the long term, says Davids. But for prices to react in the short to medium term, shareholders must stop supporting high-cost production by giving companies more funding in equity-raising exercises. Asked why Amplats, as the biggest producer, is not cutting back more, Griffith says it does not need to cut profitable production. "With 70% of the industry loss making, there is plenty of unprofitable production that should be cut," he says. Dunne says Northam is growing production — not cutting it. "In this difficult environment, it is necessary to move down the cost curve to expand our margins. It is a rational economic response to difficult market conditions," he argues. Magara says Lonmin has brought its production profile down from about 750,000oz/year to about 650,000-680,000oz. It has taken tough decisions to ensure it is cash neutral at current prices, rather than planning for a price recovery. The unknown factor is the platinum price, which is tied to numerous factors, including growth in the number of  electric cars. Predicted growth in electric vehicles’ market share, and announcements by leaders in Germany, Britain and France that they would ban internal-combustion engines in the next 20 years, appear to jeopardise long-term growth in platinum demand. But car manufacturers and platinum producers believe those predictions are overstated. Platinum is used to clean emissions from diesel engines and palladium has the same function in petrol-driven engines. It is also the catalyst in hydrogen fuel cells, one of the new cleaner-vehicle technologies. Sibanye Gold CEO Neal Froneman, who has made three large acquisitions of platinum mines in the past two years — Rustenburg Platinum, Aquarius Platinum and Stillwater in the US — said in May that long-term fundamentals, especially for palladium, remain positive. Froneman pointed out that there are deficits in palladium, and he expects that after 2020 platinum will show the same trends. He argues that growth in electric and hybrid vehicles is already priced into PGM prices, and that growth in the global car market will offset any drop in the market share of combustion vehicles. Despite what the politicians say, Dunne is also convinced that internal-combustion engines using autocatalysts have a future. "The modern combustion engine is clean, efficient and cost effective and has a natural hedge against battery electric vehicles (BEVs) — namely, the oil price. The greater the penetration of BEVs, the lower the oil price will fall, making combustion engines even cheaper," Dunne says. He adds that car buyers are looking for affordability. And with the exception of battery-powered electric vehicles, "all other electric vehicles [fuel cell and hybrids] use autocatalysts". In a recent note to clients on Impala Platinum, Sanlam Private Wealth analyst Shiraaz Abdullah disputes that the end is in sight for internal-combustion engines. He expects further restructuring and consolidation will take place in the platinum sector, which will adjust the supply/demand balance and result in price improvements, though timing is impossible to predict. These positive sentiments act as a counter to the negativity around platinum in many quarters. Magara says platinum mining is "definitely not a sunset industry". But, he adds, "we have to work together to get a better future". mathewsc@fm.co.za