The judges of the constitutional court are not the sort of men and women who lose their tempers. But if they had done so in the matter of the social grants fiasco, they would have been forgiven by the country. Having given government no less than three years to sort out the invalid contract with Cash Paymaster Services (CPS), the court last week found itself with a gun to its collective head. It had no option but to extend the contract again to ensure that 17m grants would be paid at the end of March.The court&rsquo;s finding on the competence of Bathabile Dlamini, the minister responsible for the SA Social Security Agency (Sassa), was blunt: &ldquo;The office-holder ultimately responsible for the crisis and the events that led to it is the person who holds executive political office. It is the minister who is required in terms of the constitution to account to parliament, and the minister alone.&rdquo; The court also demanded that Dlamini show reasons why she should not be held personally responsible for millions of rand in legal costs.Constitutional law professor Pierre de Vos has said that in 25 years of reading judgments, he has not seen one as scathing as this on a member of the executive.What have the minister and the executives at Sassa been doing in the years available to them? And, for that matter, if CPS has been handling the payments of grants, what does Sassa do all day? It is not as if there were no alternatives to CPS, the SA Post Office being a prime candidate.No less damning of government is the high court judgment setting aside the appointment of Berning Ntlemeza as head of the Hawks.He was put in this key law-enforcement position despite two high court judgments that said unequivocally that he lacked integrity and was dishonest. What part of that did the police minister not understand?A pattern has emerged in the appointment and retention of unsuitable people in senior positions in government and state-owned entities. Either they are incompetent, corrupt and owe their jobs to political patronage; or they may be competent and attempting to do their work, but cannot due to direct interference by the minister concerned. When ministers and officials are demonstrated to have been incompetent and/or corrupt, those who appointed them simply ignore this.As De Vos points out, judges are generally reluctant to criticise the executive because the former are not elected and the latter are. Judges are also acutely aware of the doctrine of separation of powers between the executive, legislature and judiciary.Government ministers, on the other hand, show no such sensitivity, to the point of blatantly ignoring what the courts say. In this they are evidently fully endorsed by the man who appoints them, President Jacob Zuma. This practice surely amounts to deliberate and systematic neglect of his sworn duty to defend the constitution.The senseless meddling of ministers in the administration of the state is crippling crucial institutions &mdash; unless of course this meddling is related to corruption and factional ANC politics, in which case it makes great sense but is still unacceptable. This in turn threatens government&rsquo;s ability to deliver on its constitutional obligations. Two of the most important of these are the delivery of services to the indigent, and the administration of justice to the population at large. The courts are doing what they can to protect the citizenry, but this is not a sustainable way to run a democracy.The citizens of SA are not stupid and they can be expected to pass judgment when the next elections are held.