Early last month a representative of communications minister Faith Muthambi called James Aguma&rsquo;s office. The SABC&rsquo;s acting CE was being summoned to an urgent meeting with the minister in Pretoria.According to two well-placed sources, Aguma&rsquo;s assistant found him in a boardroom with head of sport Sully Motsweni and other officials drafting the response to the parliamentary inquiry&rsquo;s damning interim report on mismanagement at the SABC. They were ordered to drop everything and rush to Pretoria.The report was particularly scathing about Hlaudi Motsoeneng, who is rumoured to be close to President Jacob Zuma though he denies this. He was depicted as running the broadcaster like a dictator with Muthambi&rsquo;s backing, purging anyone critical of his leadership and clinching dubious deals, including with the Gupta-owned The New Age Media group.An earlier draft of the SABC&rsquo;s response had apparently been leaked to Motsoeneng, who felt he&rsquo;d been hung out to dry, and wanted it fixed.Motsweni has always been a close ally of Motsoeneng. In February 2014 a report by former public protector Thuli Madonsela found Motsoeneng had irregularly promoted her and hiked her salary several times. The report also found that Motsoeneng should face a disciplinary hearing for lying about his qualifications.For years the joke in the office had been that Motsweni was "Hlaudi&rsquo;s brain". But times had changed.In the past two years Motsoeneng has suffered a string of court defeats that culminated in his being barred from holding any post at the SABC unless the public protector&rsquo;s findings are overturned in court or disciplinary proceedings against him are finalised. As the mountain of damning testimony by witnesses became harder to ignore, even his closest confidants must have begun to wonder if they were backing a losing horse.When Aguma, Motsweni and the other officials got to the meeting with Muthambi in Pretoria, they found Motsoeneng there, the sources said."He wasn&rsquo;t happy with the way he was being portrayed and shat on them from a dizzy height," said one.Motsoeneng apparently demanded that they incorporate a rebuttal he had prepared with an official from the SABC&rsquo;s legal division into their final submission to the committee, which was subsequently done, another source said.Motsoeneng won&rsquo;t be drawn on the alleged meeting. "No, my man, I don&rsquo;t want to talk about anything related to the SABC," he says, then proceeds to defend his legacy as the most powerful and divisive figure at the public broadcaster."People believe in Hlaudi &mdash; the majority," he says. "I have many people who support Hlaudi, what I&rsquo;ve done for the SABC. I&rsquo;m not regretting anything."Asked about allegations that he was responsible for the mess at the SABC, he says: "There&rsquo;s nothing like a mess that I know of. Check social media. People are saying he&rsquo;s a radical man and we need him."Does this mean he is looking forward to a career in politics after the ANC Youth League in KwaZulu Natal said it would endorse him to be appointed to the party&rsquo;s national executive committee? He says he will only decide on his future plans once he has been through his second disciplinary hearing at the SABC "to clear my name".Meanwhile, he has become something of roving public speaker at church and community meetings throughout the country. "I&rsquo;m in all the provinces addressing communities about reality," he says. "Next week I am in the Free State, then KwaZulu Natal. I&rsquo;m supported by many people, including the king (Goodwill Zwelithini) in KwaZulu Natal and traditional leaders in Limpopo."I have a vision and a plan and I implement. I&rsquo;m not apologetic."Asked repeatedly if he denies attending the meeting with Muthambi in Pretoria, Motsoeneng says: "The answer is no comment."Repeated attempts to obtain comment from Muthambi proved fruitless. Aguma also did not respond. Motsweni referred queries to SABC spokesman Kaizer Kganyago, who said: "We have no comment."