Herman Mashaba, the executive mayor of Johannesburg, has been terrifically busy in recent times. But busy doing what exactly? It’s not that there isn’t a lot to do: the City of Johannesburg is a sprawling complex metro with the largest budget in the country — R54.8bn by last year’s count. Jo’burg is also the epicentre of the country’s economy, and the city of gold continues to attract thousands every year, who flock to the city to study and work, and build a prosperous life. Mashaba’s appointment was almost by accident. Before last year’s local government election, it was difficult to imagine that the DA could snatch the relatively well-run city away from the ANC. But a perfect storm of coalition politics and a limping economy meant the pundits were confounded again. This meant the most unlikely candidate — a man with very little charisma and no experience in government — was parachuted into the position of the city’s number one citizen. Since then, he has hopped from one foot-in-mouth gaffe to the next. From flip flopping on policy proposals to his populist comments on immigrants, Mashaba has yet to impress. It’s not that he’s done nothing. He moved swiftly to appoint former Hawks boss Shadrack Sibiya to head up an anticorruption unit in the city, and Mashaba has followed through with a relentless campaign to eradicate the “widespread corruption” he claims to have found. But is this really a more important priority than doing what he was elected for: ensuring services are delivered promptly, and adeptly to the city’s residents? True, corruption is the hallmark of the Jacob Zuma administration. But the city under former mayor Parks Tau was not a cesspit, as seemed to have been the case with Tshwane, for example. If anything, Jo’burg had been improving in its audit outcomes and the auditor-general gave it an unqualified audit opinion for the third consecutive year in 2014/2015 under Tau. It was also a shining light in terms of its investment ratings. Sadly for Mashaba, Jo’burg’s problems are more directly related to delivery. This includes high levels of poverty and unemployment, backlogs and inequalities in household services, vandalism of public property, cable theft, power outages, infrastructure maintenance and water leaks. There’s also the issue of his personal style. To some, he’s already known as “Tiny Trump”, given a governance style described as “bullish”, “arrogant” and often clueless of the procedural obligations his office is tasked with fulfilling. Like Trump, Mashaba likes winning and doesn’t like being challenged, say insiders. His advisers, instead of tempering this trait, encourage it — to both his and the city’s detriment. Awkward questions are starting to emerge, such as why, if he’s so tough on corruption, he hasn’t acted against a certain DA member of his mayoral council who took her mum along on a work trip to Spain at ratepayers’ expense. Mashaba’s conduct in axing long-standing council member Anthony Still is also disturbing. Mashaba apparently was so certain that there was evidence of corruption at City Power that he ordered Still to suspend CEO Sicelo Xulu. Without any clear evidence, Still rightly refused. So Mashaba fired him. All this, while the actual problems around maintenance at the city-owned entity were ignored. Mashaba cannot continue on his populist path. The real business of local government is delivery at the coalface, which risks being neglected if he continues on this path. The consequences for Mashaba and the DA will be dire.