It has now been 11 years since Ian Kirk and Bruce Hemphill faced off in the contest to become the CEO of Liberty Group, which, to the surprise of many, Hemphill eventually won.They now once again face each other as Hemphill completes his first year as CEO of Old Mutual and Kirk completes two full years as head of Sanlam. Hemphill has the melancholy task of playing the role of official executioner of the Old Mutual Group.Many investors thought what Hemphill called managed separation (to split the company into its four main businesses) would be a quickie Las Vegas-style divorce.However, a year after it was announced progress seems to have been limited.Hemphill says 95m of head office costs have been removed and 50m has been provided for the estimated future head office costs of Old Mutual Wealth in the UK and the SA business, which is now rather grandiosely called Old Mutual Emerging Markets (OMEM).But there has been no announcement about, for example, the merchant banks to lead the listing processes, only that a juicy &pound;100m has been provided for advisory work. Hemphill does not have to worry too much about Nedbank or US asset manager OMAM, as they are already listed and have their own governance structures.One obstacle to a listing at Old Mutual Wealth is the never-ending IT cost overrun, referred to coyly as the "platform transformation". Wealth, headed by Paul Feeney, needs to be at least on par in technology with its competitors, such as St James&rsquo;s Place.Profit was down for the year, as its closed book of higher-margin endowment-style products continues to run off, but Wealth certainly has client demand. It has net inflows of &pound;5.2bn, ahead of the &pound;4.8bn net inflow into the entire mutual fund industry. It will have a secondary listing on the JSE (in 2018) so it is well worth following.Last week, Old Mutual appointed former finance minister Trevor Manuel as chairman of OMEM. Hemphill will step down as its chairman but remain on the board. Manuel has been a nonexecutive director of Old Mutual Plc since January last year.Kirk has the unenviable task of following on his predecessor Johan van Zyl s 12 years in the job, during which Sanlam was transformed from something of an industry joke to a leader.Kirk s first structural change was to set up a corporate unit to house the employee benefits business an also-ran with less than half the profit of its Old Mutual counterpart as well as the health business. Through a holding in Afrocentric, Sanlam has a holding in number two administrator Medscheme.But the Dubliner s splashiest move has been an investment in North and West Africa-focused Saham, which will make Sanlam products available in the remotest corners of the Sahara.Investors will be pleased to see the key metrics still sound dull: "consistent execution" headed many of the slides at the results presentation.Net fund flows more than doubled to R41bn and operating profit per share was up 10%. As a mature business it continues to suffer outflows from its core middle-market book, which increased by about 50% to R4.75bn, but it makes up for this with its high-margin entry-level Sanlam Sky (ex-African Life) inflows of R3.2bn.Old Mutual remains much larger in the entry-level market. Its Mass Foundation business has double the inflows and more than three times the profit of Sanlam Sky.Another string to Sanlam s bow is Glacier, the upmarket unit that includes the linked investment service provider, the international Lisp and now also all Sanlam s single-premium business. It increased operating profit by 21% to R516m. Old Mutual unfortunately does not split out its middle and upper market operations even though they are run separately: Karabo Morule runs the middle market, Kerrin Land the super affluent.But coincidentally, the R4.14bn profit of Sanlam middle market and Glacier combined is almost exactly the same as Old Mutual retail affluent s R4.09bn, though Sanlam s earnings are growing faster in this sector, at 9% against 5%. There has been quite a reversal as Old Mutual (which had global ambitions) shrinks. The core Johannesburg-based business has even now announced it plans to restrict its footprint to sub-Saharan Africa.The Emerging Markets part of the Old Mutual name will no longer be appropriate, not least because all the countries in Africa outside SA where it operates are frontier markets.Iain Williamson, the interim CEO of OMEM, says the team is reluctant to move into North African markets as the cultural differences lead to obstacles. And it plans to retreat from four large emerging markets China, India, Mexico and Colombia. But the Latin American businesses in particular had a good 2016, contributing R474m to the group. Mexico has proved receptive to clones of Old Mutual s products in SA, including funeral policies. The name is a bit too explicit for superstitious Mexicans, so it was changed to "final expenses" cover.There might be a case for keeping these businesses, as they are showing nice investment returns in the upmarket Colombian unit, have succeeded in keeping expense growth down and are growing fee-based incomes.In Asia profit was down 24% to R137m, meaning that the group makes three times as much in Namibia as it does in China and India combined.There are positive net client cash flows of R10.4bn in Latin America, but outflows of R800m in China. And Old Mutual has not taken up its option to increase its holding in Kotak Life in India from 26% to 49%. This is now the permitted maximum holding for a foreign company in an Indian insurer. So it is Sanlam that will soon have more countries in its sphere of influence. It has increased its holding in India s Shriram Life to 49%.Old Mutual&rsquo;s results do not give enough information to compare the sales and profits on a country-by-country basis.But Sanlam&rsquo;s profit in India and Malaysia of R919m was at least 50% more than Old Mutual earns in its non-African emerging markets.Old Mutual still looks stronger in African markets, but this is distorted by its 100-year-old Zimbabwean business, which accounts for more than half of the R1.65bn profit.The anchor tenant in the Sanlam portfolio is Botswana Insurance Holdings, the dominant life office and asset manager. Sanlam did not have much presence in Africa, except for Namibia, before the purchase of African Life in 2005, which was the previous owner of the Botswana business. Kirk s purchase of 46% of Saham Finances could be equally transformative.Through the Moroccan-based business Sanlam has gained access to big chunks of mainly Francophone West Africa.It has been tough for both life offices outside their Southern Africa comfort zone. Zambia and Malawi were the problem children for Sanlam. Old Mutual has high hopes that East Africa will become an important hub. Williamson says the merger with UAP has taken longer than expected and operational results are a year behind expectations: there was a R67m loss. One task has been to rightsize the property portfolio as well as the in-house property asset manager, which had lower income during the year.Hemphill describes Africa as Old Mutual s playground, but the execution has not always been slick.Simply unbundling Old Mutual Emerging Markets will not lead to a comparable rating to Sanlam. Old Mutual has obvious shortcomings, such as its uncompetitive short-term insurer, compared with Santam.Unlocking value is a lot more than a bit of basic financial engineering.