&nbsp;Italtile has always impressed with its resilience during tough times. Its fortitude, however, is being put to the test as the group digs in to defend its 45% share of SA&rsquo;s tile market."Market conditions are the worst we&rsquo;ve ever seen them," says Italtile CFO Brandon Wood.Italtile &mdash; which serves the market through its Italtile, CTM and TopT brands &mdash; faces challenges on multiple fronts. Not least of these is the fact that consumers are shying away from committing to home upgrades and renovations, which account for some 80% of its business.The problem is acute among middle-income consumers. "The segment is under severe financial pressure," says Wood.The situation is not helped by government&rsquo;s introduction, in September 2015, of affordability regulations enforcing strict lending criteria.Not even well-heeled consumers are committing to home renovations on a large scale. "The top income segments have no confidence in the economy and are reluctant to spend," says Wood.Their level of confidence will not have been done any favours by the February national budget, in which the marginal tax rate was raised to 45% from 41% and withholding tax on dividends raised to 20% from 15%.The downturn in demand became particularly acute in the second three months of Italtile&rsquo;s half-year to December, with no sign of respite in January, says Wood.Building supply groups can also expect little joy on the new home-building front. Residential building plans passed by the end of 2016 were down 0.4%, compared with an increase of 1.5% in 2015.Slack market demand is not the only big challenge Italtile is facing. Another is the strengthening of the rand, which has triggered a flood of imported tiles by the company&rsquo;s competitors, big and small, and what Wood terms "opportunistic" market entrants."There is a massive oversupply of tiles&nbsp;in the market which will have to be cleared," he says.It spells further intense price competition from which Italtile, which ended 2016 heavily overstocked, will not be spared.Italtile cites a number of reasons for its overstocked position. These include sales falling short of projections and an overly conservative approach to "safety stock levels" under its still-evolving business optimisation programme.What Italtile terms "planned deflationary price adjustments" form part of its strategy to reduce stocks in the six months to June."One thing we know is that competition will intensify and our margins will come under further pressure in the second half of our financial year," says Wood.The strengthening rand has also removed one of Italtile&rsquo;s key competitive advantages: a low reliance on imports. During four years of rand weakness that began in 2012, the company sourced more than 80% of its tile requirements locally. This was primarily from Ceramic Industries, a strategic alliance partner in which Italtile has held a 20% stake since 2012. As SA&rsquo;s largest tile producer, Ceramic contributed a R48m after-tax profit to Italtile in the six months to December.Italtile&rsquo;s proposed upping of its stake in Ceramic to 95% in a R3.61bn deal, half of which would be funded through a rights issue, is also up in the air. The proposed deal was shot down by the competition commission in July and will be the subject of a competition tribunal hearing in July.Italtile is not the only player in the building materials sector that is feeling the pinch. Rival Cashbuild&rsquo;s results for the six months to December reflected a notable fall in growth momentum.Excluding P&amp;L Hardware, acquired in a R350m cash deal closed on June 1, Cashbuild&rsquo;s sales inched ahead by 3.8% to R4.14bn. It represented a marked slowdown from the 13% rise in its year to June 2016.The brake was also in evidence at the bottom line, with headline EPS lifting 9% against a 25% rise delivered in Cashbuild&rsquo;s year to June 2016 and a 33% rise in its year to June 2015.The second six months of Cashbuild&rsquo;s year to June 2017 got off to an even weaker start. The group reported that sales in the first six weeks of the period were up 7% including P&amp;L, but down 4% excluding P&amp;L.Massmart&rsquo;s Massbuild division (Builders Warehouse, Superstore, Trade Depot, Builders Express) was also showing signs of strain in the group&rsquo;s year to December.Sales came in 5.6% up at R12.7bn, while profit before interest and tax (PBIT) was hit by strong margin pressure and was up only 2.7%, at R712.6m. The second six months of the year proved particularly tough for Massbuild, with PBIT rising by a mere 0.7% year-on-year.Amid the trying conditions it is not all bad news from Italtile. Its TopT brand, launched in 2008 to serve lower-income segments, is holding up well."The lower end of the market is proving to be very resilient," says Wood. "It was and remains an under-served segment and still offers us massive opportunity."Italtile is seizing the opportunity through aggressive expansion of TopT s store footprint. In the six months to December alone, 10 new stores were opened, against one CTM store.The new TopT stores brought the brand s total to 60 stores, almost half Italtile s 140-store line-up in SA. Italtile operates a further 11 stores outside SA, including two in Kenya and three in Tanzania.Italtile did well in the six months to December to lift sales 15.7% to R2.1bn and like-for-like (same store) sales volume 1.2%. But margin pressure was clearly evident in its trading profit, which lifted by a lesser 11.9% to R594m.The result represented a slowdown from a 15.6% rise in trading profit in the year to June 2016 and a 22% rise in the previous year.A slowdown in profit growth is likely to become far more evident in the six months to June, during which margin pressure is expected to bite even harder.Given the SA economy s current flat trajectory, weakness is likely to extend into Italtile s 2018 financial year.It is a credit to the company s standing in the market that its share price has remained resilient since the release of its interim results, falling only 2%.Italtile is a superbly managed company but on a 15.2 p:e it is looking at least fully priced.