Gentrified neighbourhoods have long been a haven for the middle class and a home to hipsters but there are also the forgotten people &mdash; families who have been around for many years who suddenly find themselves homeless or threatened.In Braamfontein, in Johannesburg&rsquo;s CBD, the streets are scummy and KFC packets clog up drains. But there&rsquo;s a distinct buzz.On one side you can buy a knock-off branded cap for R20 from a street vendor, on the other is the Neighbourgoods market where you can buy Nutella samosas, vintage clothes and freshly made paella. It&rsquo;s not far off its Cape Town counterpart in Woodstock, home to the artisanal Old Biscuit Mill market.The target for gentrification is a slightly scruffy neighbourhood &mdash; character being the preferred adjective &mdash; that&rsquo;s centrally located and historically relevant. Add a charming coffee shop or a weekend market and students and young professionals on the hunt for cheap rentals come flocking.Alexandra Appelbaum, a researcher at the SA Research Chair in Spatial Analysis &amp; City Planning, says: "The people who have been displaced are mobilising in Woodstock. We haven&rsquo;t seen that before. In Braamfontein, people have been displaced &mdash; they just haven&rsquo;t done anything to fight against it."Apartment blocks such as Rennie House have been bought by private developers like Black Pepper, replacing the previous tenants. But property developer South Point, famed for student accommodation, has targeted many of the already vacant office buildings.Josef Talotta, executive head of precinct development at South Point, says: "We call it regeneration, not gentrification."South Point CEO Ndumiso Davidson says: "Rather than displacing residents, South Point has done the opposite by introducing a completely new residential community into the district &mdash; we house 5,000 students in converted office blocks, and our students are generally from lower-income households, often from poor rural homes."South Point&rsquo;s investment in Braamfontein has been close to R1.5bn. It owns a hotel that&rsquo;s been remodelled, office blocks for NGOs and stores that belong to long-standing tenants ranging from a pharmacy that&rsquo;s been around for almost 80 years to a tailor shop with a 72-year-old tailor at the helm."On the retail side, we go to great lengths to reintegrate our established tenants into the new-look retail mix, which is paramount, in light of our country&rsquo;s history," says Davidson."We even go as far as engaging designers and branding experts to help ensure that our long-established tenants remain relevant in the new retail landscape, so they become a part of Braamfontein&rsquo;s success story, rather than marginalised by it."It&rsquo;s not a complete fairy tale. Buildings in Braamfontein have often had a copy and paste template of retail stores &mdash; there&rsquo;s a convenience store, Internet caf&eacute; and hair salon on every block."Wherever we can, we try to keep tenants but we can&rsquo;t always integrate these businesses," says Talotta.The impact of gentrification is multifaceted. There are improved job opportunities and safer neighbourhoods, but on the other side of the coin there is the displacement of local communities and businesses. On Bromwell Street in Woodstock, residents can&rsquo;t afford the rent of new properties (R5,000-R8,000 a month) or to frequent businesses in the area."The key is not to displace people," says Appelbaum. "You can create a community land trust to diversify their land to a trust so it can&rsquo;t be bought by private developers or you can create inclusive housing &mdash; a model Johannesburg is trying to adopt. The idea is to develop a portion of units to cater to people below a certain income threshold."About five houses on Bromwell Street have been sold to The Woodstock Hub, a private developer, displacing 27 tenants."There s almost a dehumanisation that takes place," says Shaun Russell, a researcher at Ndifuna Ukwazi, an activist organisation and law centre fighting for the Bromwell residents.At a court hearing for the affected residents, Judge Leslie Weinkove asked: "What s the point of being near a school? What s the point of them being near transport? Where are they going to go?"Russell says: "Since the development, prices have gone up to R2m for a house but people who live there are the poor working class. Developments are marketed as artisanal and connected to the community ... when actually they are kicking people out."Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille has plans for 10 new relocation camps in Wolwerivier on the outskirts of the city."We cannot survive in a place like Wolwerivier," says Charnell Commando, a Bromwell resident. "Most of us work night-shift at places in the area, so if we have to move far away, we ll lose our jobs."In Woodstock, developers say the target is the forgotten middle. They can t afford to live in more upmarket areas but they earn higher than the threshold for social housing.According to Broll Property Group, since Woodstock was declared an urban development zone, buildings there have had major refurbishment, resulting in an improved perception of the area.While private developers fight for the forgotten middle, there s a forgotten bottom falling by the wayside.