As investors fear another sharp market correction, guaranteed investment products are coming back into fashion.But this relates not necessarily to fixed guarantees, such as the five-year plans that are linked to bonds and promise to grow capital from, say, R1m to R1.6m, or structured products, in which there is a minimum payout provided the client stays the full five-year term. The most notable increase has been in products that follow a technique called constant proportion portfolio insurance (CPPI).The oldest such product is the Old Mutual Dynamic Floor Fund, which is nearly 15 years old. Its approach is similar to that of the funds that followed it onto the market, such as the Discovery Escalator, Sanlam Escalating and Momentum Prosperity funds.The difference is that these product ranges offer explicit guarantees from the life company.Craig Sher, head of product development at Discovery Invest, says that as guarantees are not permitted on unit trusts, these escalator products have to be held through a life product such as an endowment or retirement annuity.The guarantee for all these life products is that the product value will never be less than 80% of its highest level ever.It is quite a simple process, with no need for exotic financial instruments. Sher says there is a basket consisting of equities (an underlying equity unit trust) and cash. An algorithm ensures that as the market rises, more is allocated to equities and as it falls more is allocated to cash. Discovery buys a crash put option from a merchant bank to ensure that at the 80% level there are no further losses.Hanno Niehaus, who manages Old Mutual Dynamic Floor and its sister life fund Wealth Defender, says these funds come into their own in a major crisis. During the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 Wealth Defender fell by 4%, while the average balanced fund was down 22% and the average equity fund by 40% (see graphic). Of course it was very difficult to sell these products in the go-go years before the crisis, when everyone thought the market was bullet-proof, so few people benefited. A big benefit of the floor technology is that the unit holders can compound returns off a higher base, says Niehaus.These products give some upside in bull markets, as they are rarely fully invested in the JSE. But taking the period from May 2008, at the beginning of the crisis, to August 2016, Wealth Defender s annual return of 11.2% is still well ahead of the 9.6% from the all-share index.Steven Rosenberg, head of Sanlam Structured Solutions, says the Escalating fund has proved useful for investors who are not used to equity and have a risk appetite one stop lower. A recent example of protection was the Old Mutual Mining &amp; Resources fund it offers as an Escalating product. While the naked fund fell 30% during the 2015 commodity slump, the Escalating equivalent was down just a few percent. Escalating has not grown as fast as the naked fund during the recovery, but it has still risen a solid 18%. As it missed the downturn, Escalating has beaten all the mining funds on a three-year basis.As well as the opportunity cost of investing in these funds, there are also explicit costs. Sanlam levels a 0.8% guarantee charge as well as a further 0.69% for a non-Sanlam fund.The life offices offer CPPI on equity, high equity balanced and property funds, plus a few rand-denominated international funds. Sanlam offers the Allan Gray Orbis and Nedgroup global equity funds, for example its own global products must still be going through quality control. Discovery offers a dollar-based CPPI product on a number of approved foreign funds.Glacier International offers a somewhat different protection strategy on its offshore funds. Along with actuarial consultant Milliman it developed an options-based strategy called P2.Sanlam Global Solutions head Cobus Kruger, who runs the P2 process, says guarantee charges internationally are amazingly high, at about 2%-3%/year, and the balance sheets of the life companies offering these guarantees are often feeble. P2 was designed to manage risk as effectively as possible without guarantees.Kruger says that rather than using a simple algorithm [such as CPPI does] he hopes that adaptive technology will ensure that the P2 process becomes increasingly sophisticated.Glacier recently parted company with Milliman. Its new partner is Titian, a group of Italian academics specialising in artificial intelligence.Dynamic floor technology might seem quite primitive soon.