Within four years mobile point-of-sale terminals &mdash; devices that connect to a smartphone &mdash; will handle about 20% of the value of all retail transactions globally, says UK-based Juniper Research.Local versions are already in on that game.A company called iKhokha, which has developed its own payment device, has successfully rolled its product out to small business such as nail and hair salons, butchers, spaza shops and taverns.iKhokha MD Matt Putman, who co-founded the company with Ramsay Daly, says he had experienced the difficulty of trying to get a card machine from a bank. The idea of developing the iKhokha device came to him after he read an article in Forbes about Square, a US-based mobile payment company based in San Francisco."We wanted to really build a business that could help small enterprises and drive digital financial inclusion for all small business across SA," says Putman.iKhokha, much like its rivals Yoco and Absa&rsquo;s Pebble, securely converts any smartphone into a point-of-sale machine. The device connects to a merchant&rsquo;s smartphone through the headphone jack. It allows a customer to swipe a card and enter a pin.SA&rsquo;s rising smartphone penetration is driving the shift in which customers engage, consume digital content and transact with service providers, says Lehlohonolo Mokenela, information &amp; communication technologies industry analyst at Frost &amp; Sullivan Africa."With payment options such as Snapscan, Flickpay, iKhokha and the Pebble, customers are becoming spoilt for choice," he says."What is especially interesting about the mobile payments space, locally and globally, is that you cannot claim to have an established leader whose dominance is clear. There is still scope for start-ups to come to the market with innovative solutions, with mobility presenting perhaps one of the biggest opportunities to disrupt a sector."iKhokha devices cost R1,750 and the company charges a fee of 2.75% per transaction. Conventional banks charge at least 4% per transaction for credit card machines, while also charging a monthly fee per terminal.To differentiate itself from established services, iKhokha provides its customers with other financial products.Putman says the company has launched a cash advance product for merchants. Based on the turnover of the small business, it offers a custom cash advance accessible from within the app.iKhokha devices are used to process transactions to the value of anything between R30m and R50m a month. It has 3,500 merchants in its network.One of its biggest challenges is lack of trust. People are afraid to use their credit cards on a device they are not familiar with.Another challenge is distribution. iKhokha has entered into an exclusivity agreement with Game to get around this problem. Game began by selling iKhokha units out of five test stores in December 2015 and they have now expanded to 60 stores nationwide.Jody Forrester, commercial development executive for Game, says the retailer has sold an encouraging number of units. "We see exponential growth on the base of SMEs transacting on the devices that we sold."Customers are becoming more comfortable with digital payment solutions, Mokenela says. And merchants have found digital solutions to be less onerous and cheaper to deal with than cash."Mobile payment options may also be easier alternatives to traditional point-of-sale solutions. Due to their flexibility they may be especially appealing to smaller enterprises looking to enable digital payments, while at the same time minimising transaction fees and other associated terminal costs."Absa has signed up more than 18,000 customers on its Payment Pebble device since it launched in November 2013. Geoff Lee, head of Absa Card, says 400,000 transactions are made each month on Pebble.Yoco announced international expansion plans this month, after raising funding from two investors, US-based Quona Capital and Netherlands-based Velocity Capital. It has 6,500 local participating merchants and processes over R1bn in transactions a year. The company says 70% of the merchants it services had never accepted card payments before Yoco made it possible for them to do so.