Deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas has flagged a growing wave of populism as one of the greatest challenges facing a country battling to extricate itself from a low-growth trap. Jonas has become something of a cause célèbre for those opposing state capture after allegedly refusing a R600,000 bribe from the influential Gupta family in December 2015. This was evident when, after addressing the Gordon Institute of Business Science this week, he received a standing ovation in recognition of his courage for blowing the whistle on the family known to be close to President Jacob Zuma. “We must deal with populism. It’s like playing with hand grenades,” he told a packed audience at the business school. “How you manage your fiscus, the balance between revenue generated and expenditure, how much you borrow — those are real issues, and you can’t deal with those issues in a populist way,” he said. Jonas also stressed that, in a country that has borrowed R2.2 trillion, policy makers need to be cognisant of the views of ratings agencies. His warning is particularly pertinent, as hearings into “transformation in the finance sector” kicked off this week amid calls for banks to be “held accountable” for operating with impunity. Perhaps surprisingly, Jonas said that real economic transformation aimed at narrowing inequality would involve at least two specific interventions: breaking apart concentration in certain industries (like banking) and rethinking state monopolies (such as Eskom). Though he didn’t say as much — and was careful not to point the finger at his boss, Zuma — recent statements by the president about how the country needs to expropriate land “without compensation” seem the most obvious example of the populist rhetoric he was referring to. Addressing the house of traditional leaders two weeks ago, Zuma said: “The necessary constitutional amendments” have to be made to fast-track land restitution without compensation. But, in a sign of Zuma’s diminished political capital, few seem to believe him. Even the ANC appears to have discarded Zuma’s views: the party’s economic policy documents released this weekend speak only of paying a “just and equitable” price for land that has been expropriated. Jonas says ANC policy makers realise there is no problem with constitutional provisions about redistribution of land; rather “our problem is execution”. “The thing about the constitution, quite frankly, is a red herring. If we were to implement most of the things that are in the constitution, we would be fine as a country,” he said. It was perhaps the closest he came to criticising Zuma directly, despite numerous invitations to do so from the audience — appeals he deftly batted away. Yet he also surprisingly defended another controversial proposal: shifting responsibility for drawing up budget priorities from treasury to the presidency. Considering the tussle between finance minister Pravin Gordhan and Zuma, this move seems ominous. But Jonas said there is “nothing untoward” in this proposal. “It’s a good thing. Think about it: the budget process begins with the setting of priorities. So, which office is better placed for setting priorities, if it’s not the president’s office?” From his address to the business school it is evident that Jonas comes from the faction within the ruling party that believes radical economic transformation comes from growth, rather than from shuffling assets among the elite. He said many within his own party — the ANC — have a “very problematic” view of what constitutes redistribution. “Simply changing the colour of the asset owners means ... fundamental inequality won’t change,” he said. “There’s a growing asset-grabbing mind-set sweeping through the country at a fast rate. “And where rent-seeking is the primary means of wealth creation, institutions will be under threat.”