Born in Sweden and headquartered in Holland, Ikea is the world&rsquo;s biggest and most influential furniture group. But despite 392 stores in 48 countries, there isn&rsquo;t a store at the tip of Africa. This week the company announced that it is looking to set up links with suppliers in SA.The announcement, made at the Design Indaba in Cape Town, shows a move to collaboration between the creative giant and local operators. The company is to partner with the Indaba, working with local designers to create Ikea&rsquo;s first African collection. But it doesn&rsquo;t mean there&rsquo;s a store coming soon.Ikea has teamed up with designers, architects, artists and creatives from SA, Kenya, Egypt, C te d Ivoire, Senegal, Angola and Rwanda to collaborate around modern rituals and the importance they play in the home. SA designers involved in the project include Sindiso Khumalo, Laduma Ngxokolo and Ren e Rossouw.The furniture behemoth has noted a "creative explosion" taking place in several cities around Africa, and is curious about it.Ikea design manager Marcus Engman says design can be used to make life more practical; it can simplify life. "At Ikea we talk about democratic design," he says. This is based on five pillars, including form, function, quality and sustainability. "And what makes it democratic is the way we do things at Ikea and reach many people at the lowest possible price."Africa&rsquo;s "creative explosion" has been happening for years in the music and film industries, as well as in fashion, product design and architecture, he says. The company also plans to get architects and illustrators on board to stir the creative juices.Products for the futureIkea is one of the largest users of wood in the retail sector. An average Ikea store has about 9,500 articles, though this varies from country to country. At head office, 2,000 new products are launched a year. Engman says he is always working on products for the future, but his current favourite is a way of doing upholstery differently.Part of the initiative is to have South Africans help design products. Though locals currently cannot buy Ikea goods here, Engman says the company is "actually looking into that to find a creative solution. Maybe even [if] you can&rsquo;t buy them here, maybe we can find ways of making it possible for people to make them here".Current design trends include designing for "circularity" using and reusing material. "We think of that with everything we do," Engman says.Another trend is to get a number of people to work on each product and see what comes of it. It s about open-source thinking and designing platforms to ignite peoples creativity.Engman notes that there is quite a lot of local production already taking place. "To do great design you have to adapt your design ideas into things which are producible. I think the link between product and design is always important and part of the success of Ikea."Economic impetusDesign Indaba founder Ravi Naidoo says: "I think in the history of the Design Indaba it will be the single biggest economic impetus emanating from the platform," he says, referring to the link-up with Ikea.Naidoo explains that Ikea uses a form of reverse engineering. It provides a price cap and you work backwards, operating within this constraint. "In some instances Ikea, given [its] volumes, has been known to build an entire factory for a single product."The collaboration came about after Naidoo sat on a jury in Amsterdam convened by the UN Refugee Agency and Ikea. It was adjudicating how to ameliorate conditions in refugee camps. The relationship evolved from there.Naidoo says the collaboration is not only about the designers responsible for the collection. "It s a complex value chain affecting sourcing and manufacture in Africa too," he says, referring to the supplier base.Ikea Range &amp; Supply s supply chain manager, Henrik Elm, says the furniture retailer is always exploring new markets, both from a supply and a retail point of view. "It s been in our DNA since we were founded to always explore new opportunities. With a certain frequency we do see what are the next potential markets."In a study of the continent, SA came up as one of the countries the company should look into. (The group already has some small supply set-ups with some other African countries.)The starting point is to see which suppliers exist to cater for Ikea s range. "In Africa and especially SA there might be opportunities in metals and some of the wooden species we are using," says Elm.It s too early to quantify any time frame. The next step is to physically verify the opportunities available and determine which businesses would qualify. "Then we could probably set a timeline and maybe go into concrete business with suppliers," says Elm."We open up sourcing markets based on sourcing activities," says Elm.But how can a small business feed a huge multinational? Engman says it wouldn t be through single sourcing. Most products use various sources. He notes that the group is used to building relationships, and that the average working lifetime is more than 11 years with Ikea. "So many of our suppliers have been with Ikea for 20 years or more. And they started small."