It should come as no surprise that Discovery has a market cap higher than those of Liberty and MMI combined. While the two older businesses are still life offices at heart, Discovery has shown the ability to stretch into different product lines and various territories.The group&rsquo;s operating profit increased by 13% in the six months to December. But Discovery founders Adrian Gore and Barry Swartzberg could easily show better short-term returns if they didn&rsquo;t keep setting up new businesses. Even after throwing in the towel with its failed US insurer, Destiny Health, back in 2007, Discovery did not lose its appetite for expansion.The company has differentiated itself with its marketing flair.It sometimes looks frivolous, as it did with the 3.6m coffee and smoothie vouchers given as rewards for physical activity in SA alone. But this gimmick has led to an increase in physical activity and, more to the point, 30% fewer lapses and claims from these smoothie slurpers.The model has proved eminently portable and, having drowned China and the UK in coffee, the company is expanding the programme to the US, Hong Kong and Australia.The most eagerly awaited project is the new Discovery Bank. Gore says the group has received authorisation from the registrar of banks to establish a banking presence, but it has not received a full banking licence yet.&ldquo;It is unusual for us to set up a business in which the process unfolds in the full glare of the public,&rdquo; says Gore.So he is very hush-hush on the topic of the bank. All he can say is that it is aimed at the current target market of the group.These Discovery fans will soon be able to source their medical aid, life products, investments, short-term insurance and banking products from the shop.Judging by Discovery&rsquo;s other developments, the bank will make extensive use of cellphone apps and be based on the Discovery card. The closest model will be Investec, but Gore says that Discovery Bank will have a wider demographic base.Other initiatives are less glamorous but should come to market more quickly.Also to no-one&rsquo;s surprise, Discovery is entering the umbrella retirement fund market. It rather gave the game away when it hired Francois van Aarde, the head of administration at Alexander Forbes.Gore says it was a logical move, as Discovery already operates in the group death and disability market, has a wide range of investment options and already runs a retirement annuity and preservation fund.Another brand extension will be into the UK investment market. To date Discovery&rsquo;s UK Vitality Life business has operated only in the protection sector and not in savings.Gore loves talking about building on the same chassis, and the company has quite a platform in the UK, with 1m clients. And 60% of the Vitality Life advisers offer investment advice as well. Don t be surprised to see a slew of Vitality features embedded in the product. Free smoothie for every 100 in a pension product, perhaps?Gore says the group expects its new initiatives to take about five years to come to profitability. Discovery Insure, the short-term insurer, will be profitable in the second half after six years, held back by heavy spending on telematic tracking technology.In fact, it has 5.4bn km of data, collected from its driver clients. Discovery Insure is launching a commercial insurance division to get access to the 35% of gross written premium, and telematics will be even more relevant to this sector.Discovery s mature businesses remain in good shape, with Health s operating profit up 12% and Life s up 13%, and much of the cash thrown off is recycled to the same units or others in the group.PSG Equity fund manager Shaun Le Roux says Discovery is undervalued in view of its current value and future potential. It is now the largest share in his fund.But Discovery is moving into a sleek new head office soon, and this has often been a sell signal.