In today&rsquo;s connected world, the road to financial wellness is probably a meandering journey that encompasses global markets and destinations. The world is a big stage with opportunities that simply cannot be limited to one country or one market.For this reason, it is imperative that your banking relationship reflects this global reality. However, this is easier said than done if you don&rsquo;t have access to expertise and resources across multiple territories and jurisdictions that simplify your wealth management needs.Investec&rsquo;s fully integrated service offering across the private banking, financing and investment landscape provides unparalleled simplicity and access to industry-leading expertise and products.&ldquo;Our &lsquo;Investec. One Place&rsquo; proposition is where this philosophy comes to life,&rdquo; says Deon Katz, head of Investec Private Banking, South Africa. &ldquo;We recognise that our clients are global citizens, so we provide them with seamless, integrated access to banking and investment services, both locally and internationally.&ldquo;Through our sophisticated Investec digital platforms, they have access to all their accounts with one login from anywhere in the world, but they can also contact our 24/7 global client support centre and speak to a specialist private banker.&rdquo;Investec&rsquo;s recognition by the Financial Times of London as South Africa&rsquo;s best private bank and wealth manager &ndash; for four consecutive years &ndash; is testament to the success of its international offering. This is an accolade we don&rsquo;t take lightly, nor do we allow this to become a source of complacency.But, in an age of overreliance on technology, big data and analytics, can the solution to all your international banking and investment requirements be online?The reality is that data often gets the numbers right, but the people wrong. It strips, rather than empowers, you of your individuality. Increasingly, organisations are using broad brushstrokes to paint a picture of their clients and to deliver generic financial services solutions.Katz says: &ldquo;Investec Private Banking is offering an alternative perspective on bank-client relations that focuses on the importance of individual needs, wants and preferences. With a new campaign called #MoreThanData, we emphasise that where other organisations see their clients as the sum of data, Investec sees you.&rdquo;We know that it&rsquo;s impossible for cold data to tell us who you really are &ndash; what you are passionate about, what you hope to achieve, what you want your legacy to be ultimately. Your individual banking needs and priorities differ as much as your life goals and aspirations differ from your peers.Although we use sophisticated data analytics as enabling tools, we don&rsquo;t believe in a one-dimensional approach where we place you into a rigid, predefined box.That&rsquo;s why we take the time to get to know you personally and professionally and form a long-term relationship. By combining this in-depth banking relationship with our international investment expertise, we can personalise our products and services and ultimately ensure an extraordinary client experience.&ldquo;This is certainly not a new approach for Investec. This personal connection and a client experience that is personal, flexible and simply out of the ordinary will remain at our core,&rdquo; Katz says.In closing, your definition of success is personal and individual. You deserve an international bank and investment manager that really knows you and has the expertise to back you throughout your life.&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For more information on our #MoreThanData campaign, including our vignettes, main film and documentary, please visit www.morethandata.co.za.This article was paid for by Investec Private Bank (South Africa).