Bidvest&rsquo;s spinning off of its international food distribution business, Bidcorp, on May 30 last year left a very SA-dominated group reporting interim results to December. And it shows in a less than inspiring 4.4% rise in headline EPS (HEPS).Bidvest CEO Lindsay Ralphs put a different spin on the results, describing them in a results presentation as &ldquo;robust&rdquo;. Trading profit of R2.9bn was up 7.5%, he stressed in support of his assertion.But with Bidvest&rsquo;s seven divisions giving it linkages to virtually every sector in the SA economy, the R72bn annual revenue group is very much a barometer of the country&rsquo;s state of health.Arguably, it is not by chance that the 7.5% trading profit rise is virtually equal to what Investec economist Kamilla Kaplan says was a rise of 7.7% in SA&rsquo;s nominal (inflation included) GDP in 2016.Ralphs hopes for better things to come in the second half of the financial year &mdash; with one key proviso: &ldquo;It is subject to reasonable political stability. Given stability, business confidence will pick up and the economy will pick up.&rdquo;Encouragingly, Ralphs said there are green shoots appearing, with the group having had &ldquo;quite a good January&rdquo;.Among the positives is an increase in exports of commodities, especially manganese and chrome, through port terminals operated by Bidvest Freight, the group&rsquo;s second-biggest profit generator.Bidvest Freight will also handle large volumes of maize imports during most of the second half of Bidvest&rsquo;s financial year, said Ralphs.He is also looking to less challenging trading conditions for Bidvest Automotive. In a market in which new vehicle sales fell 13%, it performed well in the latest six-month reporting period to lift trading profit 1.9% to R364.5m.But don&rsquo;t expect anything spectacular. &ldquo;We anticipate new vehicle sales in 2017 to remain flat,&rdquo; said Ralphs. &ldquo;But used vehicle sales should improve. We are seeing a pick-up.&rdquo;Better things are also expected from Bidvest Office &amp; Print, where trading profit slid 13.9% to R357.5m in the latest reporting period. Restructuring is a &ldquo;work in progress&rdquo;, said Ralphs, who promised &ldquo;much improved&rdquo; second-half results, given rand stability.But Bidvest will have to pull more out of the hat if it is to justify its very generous 15.6 p:e. Bidvest s valuation is stretched compared with the likes of Barloworld and Imperial, says Unum fund manager Michele Santangelo.Ralphs said Bidvest has a strategy in place to boost its growth pace. But it is a strategy that will keep Bidvest firmly within the confines of its existing areas of expertise: trading, distribution and services.Ralphs ruled out the potential for a major acquisition in SA, where the focus is on bolt-on acquisitions in the R100m-R200m league. But bolt-ons can be much bigger, he said, pointing to the acquisition of industrial tools distributor Brandcorp in October for R2bn.Bidvest also has its eye on offshore expansion. We have identified one or two targets and are already engaged in some discussions, said Ralphs. They are in industries in which we operate in SA. If and when offshore acquisitions come, they could be sizeable. We have offshore debt capacity of up to US$1bn if needed, said Ralphs.He said Bidvest s low debt level and strong cash flow in SA give it ample headroom to cope with acquisitions.This largely rules out any possibility of Bidvest selling its 38.4% stake in Adcock Ingram (worth R4bn) or 27.2% stake in Comair (worth R715m) any time soon. Indeed, Bidvest is riding high on recent strong gains in Adcock and Comair s share prices, which were primarily responsible for its basic earnings rising by R540m (37%) in the six months to December.Share price gains by Adcock and Comair since the start of 2017 are worth a further R500m in total to Bidvest, said Ralphs.Consensus analysts forecasts indicate that Bidvest s growth pace will pick up in the six months to June, with full-year HEPS of about 9% expected, followed by a gain of about 12% in the year to June 2018. These are growth numbers that Bidvest s current rating appears to be at least fully discounting.A better alternative would appear to lie in Bidvest s sister company, Bidcorp, which roared in in its half-year to December with HEPS up 20.3%. Adding to Bidcorp s attraction as an alternative investment is a 16 p:e rating, virtually in line with that of Bidvest.