It has been said that the older we get, the more we tend to look for tranquillity, seeking out a lifestyle that embraces the finer things in life. The kids have left the nest and retirement is on the cards. That&rsquo;s not to say you should live in a retirement village; some people simply want to downscale to a smaller home that requires less maintenance.It&rsquo;s during this time that most people are in the market for a carefree, lock-up-and-go lifestyle. While having lots of space in your home might be pleasing, it can be expensive and time consuming to maintain. The same goes for gardens. Why maintain a colossal garden if you could live in an estate that already has lush, indigenous landscaping?This trend towards downscaling is well known in the property market. According to Property24, the latest FNB estate agents survey for the second quarter of 2016 shows that the largest group of sellers, 26%, are those selling to downscale due to their life stage. This form of downscaling refers to sellers who want a smaller home, usually because they are getting older or because their children have left home.Many of these people are moving to the Western Cape, where property is providing a good return on investment thanks to the ever-growing rate of &ldquo;semigration&rdquo; that sees people spending the later part of their lives by the coast. It&rsquo;s not difficult to figure out why the Cape has become such a desirable place to spend these years, and Somerset West is a stunning part of the area. Situated on the leafy slopes of the Helderberg, Somerset West is located in the heart of the Cape Winelands and a short drive from Cape Town International Airport, with a splendid view of False Bay.The area is known for its world-renowned vineyards. Rows of vines decorate the Helderberg landscape, which serves as a spectacular view when dining at the wineries&rsquo; award-winning restaurants.&nbsp;Spend your weekends at Erinvale Golf and Country Club, a championship golf course, popular with international and local residents.A mere stone&rsquo;s throw from the Helderberg Nature Reserve and Gordon&rsquo;s Bay, Somerset West is also ideal for those who love to spend their time in nature. Many of the town&rsquo;s estates take full advantage of this location, such as the Somerset Lakes estate, which is located near these natural wonders but conveniently close to services such as the Vergelegen Mediclinic and Vergelegen Plein, a brand-new shopping centre home to Woolworths Food, Checkers and many other handy shops.Marvellous townhouses and family homes can be found in the many upmarket estates in and around Somerset West. On-estate facilities and activities are becoming quite popular, diminishing the need to leave the estate. Private schools such as Reddam House and Curro Castle have strategically positioned themselves for this purpose. The plus side is that if you buy a property close to good schools, it is more likely that you will see a higher return on investment.Many downscalers are looking to estates for convenience and the all-in-one lifestyle package. One advantage is the ease of access to athletic activities. Gym facilities and a swimming pool are on offer at most estates, ensuring you live an adventurous lifestyle. Some, like Somerset Lakes, have benefits such as an actual lake to swim in, as well as outdoor gymnasiums and obstacle courses, making sure there is plenty to do for the families who live there.Security is another imperative factor that potential downscalers consider. Gated communities provide a good option, with many sparing no expense in providing world-class security systems.The benefits of buying a home in Somerset West that fits with your downscale lifestyle are undeniable. With exquisite panoramic views and countless leisure and adventurous activities, your new life will be everything you have always imagined and more.This article was paid for by Somerset Lakes.