Anil Agarwal&rsquo;s &pound;2bn purchase of an&nbsp;effective 13% in Anglo American, through a bond issued by his Volcan Investments family trust, is well-timed.Investec Securities says corporates are seeing value in Anglo that the market has ignored. Investec estimates Anglo&rsquo;s unlisted assets (which include De Beers, Minas-Rio and its base metals) are only valued at 38% of their true worth. It sees 48% upside on the shares to 1,706p (about R269) against the 1,195p when its commentary was issued.Volcan is the major shareholder in Vedanta Resources, whose core commodity, zinc, has surged in price over the past year.The move also comes shortly after the announcement of the retirement of Anglo&rsquo;s chairman, Sir John Parker, at the next annual general meeting.Agarwal has said he will not seek a board seat but there are no legal barriers to appointing him, and he has 12 years of experience chairing a London-listed company.Since Agarwal admitted in an interview with Bloomberg at Davos in January that he had suggested a merger of Vedanta&rsquo;s subsidiary Hindustan Zinc with Anglo, and had been rebuffed, it seems unlikely he will remain a passive shareholder. Volcan&rsquo;s pledge not to make a takeover offer is binding for six months."It may be that Agarwal might connect with the Public Investment Corp (PIC) in an attempt to carve up Anglo assets for their mutual benefit," says SP Angel analyst John Meyer.Vedanta comes with some environmental and reputational liabilities which might make the PIC think twice about a partnership, but this is an issue for most big mining companies. Anglo American faces silicosis claims in SA while Vale and BHP Billiton will have to pay heavily after the failure of a tailings dam at Samarco in Brazil.Vedanta is defending a legal action in London from Zambian communities for pollution of the Kafue River by Konkola Copper Mines. The Norwegian government pension fund has excluded Vedanta from its investment universe for failure to comply with government regulations in Zambia and at four locations in India.In its sustainability report, Vedanta says the issues in Zambia go back 11 years and the matter is sub judice. It has invested in clean technologies and upgrades at Konkola.Meyer says it is no secret that Agarwal would like to merge parts of Anglo with Hindustan Zinc, which is expected to have about $8bn in cash by the end of the year because of the high price of zinc. Anglo American has about $8.5bn of debt."So simply putting the balance sheets together is a match," Meyer says. "The rest of the rationale for an outright merger of Anglo with Hindustan Zinc is debatable, though banging mining assets together usually results in billion-dollar cost savings, in our view."Vedanta s only assets outside India are Konkola, the $400m Gamsberg Zinc project in SA and the Skorpion zinc smelter in Namibia. Its core commodities are zinc, aluminium, coal-fired power generation and oil and it also mines iron ore in Goa. Anglo has no assets in India. Its core commodities are copper, diamonds and platinum and its noncore commodities are iron ore and SA thermal coal.If Agarwal is planning to pick up Anglo assets, he had an expert at hand in former Anglo CEO Cynthia Carroll, who was appointed an adviser to the board in 2015.Anglo s shares surged 6.3% to R202.73 on the JSE after Agarwal s plans were disclosed.