Political pressure is mounting on President Jacob Zuma to act against social development minister Bathabile Dlamini, whom the constitutional court has blamed for the social grants fiasco that put payments to about 17m beneficiaries at risk.Even the ANC last Friday called for "consequences" for those responsible. This places Zuma in an awkward position: Dlamini is a loyal lieutenant and at the forefront of the campaign for his candidate, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, to succeed him as party president.A meeting of the ANC&rsquo;s national executive committee (NEC) that is to take place over the weekend is set to reflect on the matter and on calls for Dlamini&rsquo;s head. Already, Dlamini has appeared before the party&rsquo;s integrity committee, which will report back to the NEC meeting over the weekend.The judgment was an indictment of the minister&rsquo;s conduct and must have embarrassed Zuma, who a day before told parliament that SA was a "funny democracy" with a "funny legal system" because of calls to act against her when the April 1 deadline for payments had not yet been missed.A day later, he toned down the arrogant stance he adopted in parliament, announced that he would lead an interministerial task team to ensure that the court judgment would be adhered to, and apologised "unreservedly" to the nation.However, ANC insiders are concerned about the impact of the grants debacle on confidence in government to deliver on one of its most basic promises, which is also a strong campaign issue during elections.It is in fact a "funny democracy" if Dlamini is not held accountable.In its judgment, the constitutional court said: "The minister bears the primary responsibility to ensure that Sassa [the SA Social Security Agency] fulfils its functions. She appoints its CEO. There is little the CEO can do without her direction. Attempts to obtain evidence of what steps she took after [the] AllPay 2 [judgment] to ensure that beneficiaries would continue to be well catered for drew a blank."The AllPay 2 judgment refers to the initial constitutional court judgment, handed down in 2014 that deemed the contract with Cash Paymaster Services invalid. But the court suspended the invalidity until March 31 this year to give Sassa and the minister time to hold a fresh bidding process for the social grant tender or ensure that Sassa developed the in-house capacity to make the payments. None of this happened in the three years since that judgment was handed down.The constitutional court&rsquo;s majority judgment last week continues: "The office-holder ultimately responsible for the crisis and the events that led to it is the person who holds executive political office. It is the minister who is required in terms of the constitution to account to parliament. That is the minister, and the minister alone."The court has asked the minister to furnish reasons why she should not be held personally liable for costs in the matter.The ANC also broke its silence last Friday, saying events over the past few weeks had been "unnecessary and should never have happened". Spokesman Zizi Kodwa called for "harsh consequence management as a deterrent to a repeat of this matter"."Government must thoroughly investigate the actions of those involved and act decisively against those responsible for this embarrassing and undesirable situation," he said.But where has the party been as the crisis reached a tipping point in recent weeks?Senior leaders, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the party&rsquo;s officials had met Dlamini to determine whether the matter would be resolved. But its top six, particularly its secretariat, have had previous experience with attempting to rein in Zuma&rsquo;s ministers.Luthuli House tried to intervene in the crisis in the SABC long before parliament did, but was met by resistance from communications minister Faith Muthambi, also seen as a close ally of the president. Muthambi has now been dealt with by parliament, and the party hopes its caucus will adopt a similar approach to Dlamini."We have enough faith in those MPs. We expect [them] to take the minister through accountability steps," says an NEC member. Another member has raised concern about whether the Zuma grouping will use the social grants crisis against national treasury and finance minister Pravin Gordhan, but says treasury has appeared cautious.Speaking in parliament last week, Gordhan deferred to the wisdom of the constitutional court &mdash; the matter was to be heard a day after his appearance before the public accounts committee. He also stressed that the delineation of responsibility is critical in the executive and it is Dlamini&rsquo;s department, not treasury, that bears ultimate responsibility for the delivery of social grants.ANC allies the SACP and Cosatu took a tougher line. During a bilateral meeting last week, the SACP called on the ANC to act against Dlamini and all those responsible. This followed Cosatu s decision to call for Dlamini s head.SACP second deputy general secretary Solly Mapaila said it is critical that those who caused so much "reputational damage" to the party over this matter should be held to account. Also, the anxiety caused to recipients over whether they would be paid on April 1 should not be swept under the carpet, particularly at a time when the ANC s role as "leader of society" is under threat, as observed in its declining electoral support.Cosatu spokesman Sizwe Pamla said the constitutional court judgment points to "serious capacity problems" in government. "It is obvious these problems are associated with disrespect for the constitution by some government employees and political deployees," he said on Friday. He said the situation of the public protector and the courts constantly having to provide leadership is an indication that even parliament is "sleeping at the wheel"."The ANC needs to close the widening trust deficit between its government and the people by holding all its deployees accountable for their failures and also by elevating the standards it holds them to," Pamla said.The ANC Youth League in KwaZulu Natal also called for Dlamini s head. It, too, is supporting Dlamini-Zuma to lead the ANC after Zuma, and insiders say the minister s handling of the social grants issue could taint that campaign hence the call by those seen as her allies.Zuma is now in a corner: he has to act against Dlamini a key political ally or once again prove the lack of accountability in his administration.The ANC s NEC meeting at the weekend will provide a glimpse of how this matter will be dealt with. But each day that passes is likely to deepen the erosion of confidence caused by Dlamini s handling of the crisis, with opposition parties latching on to the issue to roast the governing party.