This is a shortened version of the Financial Mail cover story. To read the full story and other premium content, click here to subscribeBy NATASHA MARRIAN, CLAIRE BISSEKER, MARC HASENFUSS, STAFFORD THOMAS AND ROB ROSEOn Monday night, President Jacob Zuma told the top five leaders of the ANC, who had gathered at Luthuli House in Jo&rsquo;burg, that he planned to fire finance minister Pravin Gordhan and his deputy, Mcebisi Jonas.The party&rsquo;s top officials &mdash; Cyril Ramaphosa, Jessie Duarte, Gwede Mantashe, Zweli Mkhize and Baleka Mbete &mdash; were shocked. After all, it was barely 15 months since Zuma had torpedoed the rand and burnt SA&rsquo;s credibility by axing then-finance minister Nhlanhla Nene.Surely not again, they must have thought. Mantashe apparently put up the strongest resistance to Zuma&rsquo;s move. Ramaphosa and Mkhize raised their voices too.Jannie Durand, CEO of Johann Rupert&rsquo;s investment giant Remgro, seemed despondent. "Unfortunately (Nelson Mandela&rsquo;s) legacy and the country that he left behind has lost its integrity completely today. It takes years to build a reputation and a track record, but only one act to totally ruin it," he said.The chairman of a large investment firm said "removing Gordhan would be disappointing. He has a proven track record that stretches way back to the struggle days, and does not deserve to be treated so shabbily".Others said it was evident that Zuma&rsquo;s administration can&rsquo;t seem to grasp the fact that consistency and stability in economic and fiscal policy were the keys to attracting investment locally and from abroad.Business Leadership SA, chaired by Telkom chairman Jabu Mabuza, and representing the top companies on the JSE, said Zuma&rsquo;s damage to investor sentiment "should not be underestimated". They called on politicians to "put the economic welfare of the country first", clearly implying Zuma wasn&rsquo;t doing so.The Chamber of Mines echoed this view, saying Zuma&rsquo;s recall of Gordhan was "damaging to our country&rsquo;s reputation".A visibly frustrated Investec CEO Stephen Koseff told the Financial Mail: "I know it&rsquo;s the presidential prerogative to decide who needs to be his minister of finance, but at the end of the day we are not growing, and we have to. We are going to grow only if there is stability and confidence."Koseff says that if Gordhan is replaced, there will be a lot of "upset sell-out" from the country &mdash; and not only by international investors. "People will not take it well."This is a peek into the in-depth Financial Mail&nbsp;cover story.If you are already a subscriber, please click on the following link to go to the full article: This is what will happen to the economy when Zuma purges Pravin.If you would like to&nbsp;subscribe &nbsp;to BusinessLIVE Premium to read the full story, please&nbsp;click here: Subscribe.