Standard Bank, led by joint CEs Sim Tshabalala and Ben Kruger, looks in good shape. After years of underperformance relative to peers, it finally appears to be “moving forward”. Since 2010, the company has retreated from global emerging markets, electing instead to focus on Africa. The strategy appears to be paying off. For the year to December 2016, headline earnings from the group’s banking activities rose 9% on double-digit earnings growth from its two largest divisions — personal & business banking (PBB) and corporate & investment banking. On a constant currency basis, Standard Bank’s rest-of-Africa region increased headline earnings 7% to R5.7bn. “Though relatively small, the 66% growth in PBB in Africa is very encouraging for the longer-term growth prospects of the group,” says Andrew Vintcent, a portfolio manager at ClucasGray Asset Management. Since 2010, the bank has tripled revenue from Africa regions to R30bn, with earnings from the rest of the continent now contributing 25% to group earnings. It has achieved a 5% decrease in its cost-to-income ratio over this time, helping to boost return on equity to 15.3% last year, slightly down on the previous year but significantly above the 12.7% posted in 2010. Issues that had kept Anchor Capital from investing in the bank are abating somewhat, says Anchor analyst Liam Hechter. “Over the past few years the amount of capital allocated to entities outside of the traditional SA banking operations increased the risk of negative surprises. We do, however, feel that capital allocation is continuously improving and we have become far more constructive on Standard Bank as an investment,” Hechter says. Not even the disastrous performance of its insurance subsidiary, Liberty, was enough to deter investors. Liberty weighed on group headline earnings, which increased 4% to R23bn. The share price closed 6.54% stronger at R155.95 on the day Standard Bank announced full-year results. At the time of writing, it was trading at about R150, still firmer year-to-date after a 33.7% gain in 2016. “We are bullish on the share price at this stage. Our one-year target price is R176.67/share,” says Avior Capital Markets analyst Harry Botha. New core banking systems will improve customer experience and product cross-sell, further boosting Standard Bank’s PBB franchise, which achieved the highest headline earnings growth among the big four banks, says Botha. Improving customer experience will become increasingly important amid fierce competition between retail banks in SA, likely to intensify with the entry of Discovery’s bank next year. “[Standard Bank] should be using the time it has to ensure retail clients have a value proposition that is at least on par with what Discovery will bring to the market,” says Hechter. Botha, who is concerned that Standard Bank has lost traction in the retail middle market, says: “Standard Bank will have similar quality systems and much more data than Discovery — it just needs to use the data.” While six analysts have a “sell” rating on the stock, four a “buy” and two a “hold”, according to Bloomberg data, ClucasGray’s Vintcent believes the bank has a compelling investment case, citing “an inexpensive valuation, with steady near-term growth and very interesting longer-term prospects”. A 16% increase in its dividend in 2016, to 780c/share, signals that the bank is well capitalised and confident of its prospects, Vintcent says.