&ldquo;Buy when others are fearful.&rdquo; This advice from master investor Warren Buffett appears particularly appropriate to Pioneer Food Group.The market took fright following the release of Pioneer&rsquo;s trading update for the six months to March. Warning of a 38%-58% headline EPS slump sent the R21bn annual revenue food group&rsquo;s share price diving 10% within five days of the release.It was not that CEO Phil Roux had left the market in the dark. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s been a year out of hell,&rdquo; he told Financial Mail in December.This was due to the devastating drought, which sent food commodity prices soaring. Essential foods such as maize meal and bread are a major factor in Pioneer&rsquo;s performance, accounting for some 60% of its revenue and operating profit in a normal year.Maize, where a 1.2Mt production shortfall was predicted, posed a problem. Pioneer had no option but to buy maize forward.Then came the rain, sending the maize price into free fall. But it will bring no benefit to Pioneer until futures contracts bought at higher prices begin unwinding.Some benefit should start coming through next month, but it will only be in the first half of Pioneer&rsquo;s year to September 2018 that the real lower price bonanza will kick in, says Vunani Securities analyst Anthony Clark. An unrepentant supporter of Pioneer, he says: &ldquo;The white maize price has halved over the past 12 months.&rdquo;Equally bullish, Old Mutual Mid &amp; Small-Cap Fund manager Warren Jervis says: &ldquo;The market should look through Pioneer&rsquo;s latest six-month results.&rdquo;High food commodity price volatility will also hit Tiger Brands, but to a lesser extent. In its 2015/2016 reporting period, milling and baking accounted for 29% of revenue and 38% of operating profit.Tiger has yet to provide an earnings guideline; its trading update for the four months to January only reported a 12% year-on-year sales increase. The update has left Tiger&rsquo;s share price virtually unchanged.Clark believes the sales rise will not be enough to stave off a fall in Tiger&rsquo;s earnings: &ldquo;If I had to take a stab at its interim headline earnings, I would say they will be down in the mid to high teens.&rdquo;Investec Asset Management analyst John Thompson disagrees. He believes Tiger will report at least a 5% rise in headline earnings in its half-year to March.Thompson also calls Pioneer&rsquo;s investment merit into question. &ldquo;No branded food company should experience such a high level of earnings volatility,&rdquo; he says.Roux argues that under normal conditions essential foods produce high margins and strong cash flow. But he acknowledges that reducing the relative importance of maize-and wheat-based essential foods is now a priority.Pioneer is well positioned to deliver on this priority. With an almost ungeared balance sheet, it is armed with up to R4bn in debt capacity.Non-African offshore acquisitions appear to be the most likely route Pioneer will follow.Already in the fold are two factories in the UK producing breakfast cereals and generating some R1bn in annual revenue. And Streamfoods, a UK producer of a range of fruit snacks, was brought into Pioneer&rsquo;s fold in August in a &pound;7.5m deal. It will add another R250m in annual sales.Roux has also hinted that Eastern Europe could be a hunting ground for acquisitions.It seems unlikely that Tiger will head for new pastures, as it is licking wounds sustained in an ill-conceived drive into Africa.Gone is Tiger s nemesis, Dangote Flour Mills in Nigeria, which was offloaded for a token US$1 in December 2015. Also gone is a 51% stake in East African Group of Ethiopia. And on its way out is a 51% stake in Kenya-based Haco. All that remains is Cameroonian confectionery firm Chococam and a 49% stake in biscuit producer UAC Foods Nigeria.For now, it would seem, Tiger s focus will be on extracting value from its SA operations. Headed since May 2016 by the experienced Lawrence MacDougall, Tiger has plenty of value to extract, says Thompson. Tiger s gross margin is at its lowest ever, he says. I expect to see it lift quite a lot over the next few years. MacDougall is also likely to put a new cost-cutting strategy on the table. Pioneer has also set its sights on ramping up margins, with Roux targeting an operating margin of at least 13.5% by the end of 2018. This would be up from 11% in the 2016 financial year and 4% in 2013, the year Roux became CEO.Pioneer s share price is down almost a quarter from its August 2015 peak. Over the same period Tiger s has risen 40%, driven largely by faith in MacDougall to restart Tiger s growth engine.It looks about time for Pioneer s price to start playing catch-up.