Let’s begin, please, with a clarification of the various linkages. There’s the Gauteng provincial government the Gauteng Partnership Fund and the Gauteng Infrastructure Financing Agency. Then, of course, there’s you — not only as chair of ANC Gauteng but also mainly involved here as the MEC for co-operative governance & traditional affairs and human settlements. Who’s in charge? In 2014 the fifth Gauteng provincial government administration adopted the programme for transformation, modernisation & re-industrialisation. It stems from 10 pillars. In 2015, when opening the Gauteng infrastructure investment conference, Gauteng premier David Makhura announced that the province needed an injection of about R1.8 trillion to invest in social and economic infrastructure. To accelerate economic growth through infrastructure investment, the province then introduced the infrastructure political steering committee, chaired by the premier, and the steering committee to eliminate red tape in government at both provincial and local levels, led by me as the province’s member of the executive committee for co-operative governance & traditional affairs and human settlements. In these capacities I’m also responsible for implementation of the large human settlements, which can be described as post-apartheid cities. This work is being carried out by the Gauteng partnership fund with other government agencies, including the Gauteng Infrastructure Financing Agency. We’re talking about a huge vision. How would you define it? What’s the philosophy that inspired it? The vision is to build a globally competitive Gauteng city region. It requires that we implement seamless programmes in all Gauteng municipalities across the five development corridors. These corridors are the following: • The central corridor, anchored by the City of Johannesburg, which is a financial and information & communication technology hub of our economy; • The northern corridor, anchored by the City of Tshwane, which is the automotive industry hub and the capital city of our country; • The eastern corridor, anchored by the City of Ekurhuleni, which is the manufacturing hub and an aerotropolis centre of our province; • The southern corridor, anchored by the Sedibeng (Vaal) area, which is the home of SA’s steel industry and a tourist attraction, particularly with huge opportunities around the Vaal river; and • The western corridor, anchored by the West Rand, which is the home of the mining industry and agroprocessing, as well as a tourist attraction around the Maropeng Cradle of Humankind. Implementation is aligned with the National Development Plan: Vision 2030. The rollout of the megaprojects is informed by this approach. We will endeavour to build compact cities in all these development areas as our new post-apartheid cities. So it’s not only a grand vision but also a grand plan. Can you identify the factors that make you confident the plan is capable of implementation, particularly to allay the sceptics who’ve become disillusioned by government plans that gather dust? Megaprojects must be seen against the backdrop of our programme for transformation, modernisation & re-industrialisation. The plans are being implemented as we speak. After the infrastructure investment summit we held in May, the partnership fund appointed a fund manager led by John Oliphant to kick off our capital-raising campaign. Now the fund is working with key pension fund stakeholders, including the Public Investment Corp (PIC), to produce appropriate investment models. An infrastructure bond might be among them. Also, Gauteng has budgeted R49bn for infrastructure investment during the current medium-term expenditure framework period. What are the plan’s major features in terms of projects, timelines and budgets? There are 31 huge human settlement projects. Some have already attained all necessary approvals. Though the province does make funding available, we want the private sector to partner with us. About 10 projects will kick off during this financial year. Building new cities means there is a need to invest in more hospitals, smart schools, improved public transport and roads, including new freeways and other critical infrastructure. We’ve planned eight new hospitals and 20 schools for the next two years. In addition, a feasibility study for the extension of the Gautrain system has been completed. Though money has been made available for most of these projects, in some cases more funding is required, particularly for bulk services. Again, there’ll be opportunities for the private sector to partner with us. Are the terms “mega human settlements” and “post-apartheid cities” marketing jargon or a real promise with consequences, like being voted out of office, if they don’t materialise? They’re already materialising. We’re creating these cities on the understanding that decent housing is a human right. It contributes to restoring the dignity of our people. Within the means of the Gauteng provincial government, we must provide shelter for those who cannot afford to provide for themselves. What is there to attract pension funds, not only as responsible investors but also in terms of hard long-term investment returns? Investment opportunities presented through the megaprojects should be attractive to long-term investors such as pension funds. Depending on the stage of a project, investors should be able to achieve returns consistent with the level of project risk. These returns would obviously need to be competitive against other alternatives available in the marketplace. Mightn’t you perhaps be sparking a “price war” on rates against, say, SA government and government-backed bonds in which retirement funds invest under Regulation 28 of the Pension Funds Act? We have engaged with various pension fund industry bodies and the savings industry at large. There is appetite to invest directly in infrastructure projects. Through the partnership fund we will put forward investment instruments that allow investors to invest directly in projects. When institutions are called to invest directly in infrastructure projects, rather than indirectly through bonds, what would be the relative advantages for them to decide on the former? Typical capital structures will apply. Investors would have an opportunity to be equity partners, lenders or both. The only difference is that the cash flows generated by the projects would have to sustain the capital structures. A provincial government does not have the ability to borrow. Thus our role is limited to creating a supportive policy environment that facilitates the flow of funds from investors directly to projects. However, working with such institutions as the PIC, we should be able to raise an infrastructure bond that will invest in some of our projects. Tell us how you envisage that the public-private partnerships will work. For example, will targeted investors be canvassed at the outset on their appetite for particular projects? Will you co-operate with them in agreeing on acceptable returns? Will they have direct lines of sight into the projects, not only on sticking to budgets but also on adherence to acceptable governance standards, from beginning to end? In 2002 we established the partnership fund with the specific mandate to facilitate implementation of social housing and create a platform for private sector investors to participate, as partners with the province, in the affordable-housing space. To date the partnership fund has attracted funding partners such as the PIC, Futuregrowth and the National Housing Finance Corp into funding of affordable housing as an asset class. With this success, we have expanded the partnership fund mandate for the inclusion of megaproject funding to fast-track big cities. Our vision of big cities is integrated human settlements characterised by self-sufficiency in the provision of housing, social amenities, quality infrastructure and employment opportunities through small industries. The partnership fund is the vehicle for mobilisation of the required capital to build strategic and sustainable partnerships with the private sector, donor community and development-finance institutions. Would investors be able to exit prior to a project’s completion? If so, how and under what circumstances? We’re looking for long-term partners. Pension funds are identified because of their need to match assets with long-term liabilities. The partnership fund is exploring the possibility of listing a megaprojects bond. It will go a long way towards offering liquidity for investors who require it. Where will you find the land for all these projects? Does the provincial government own tracts that it can release? Are you expecting that national government will assist by releasing some tracts, unoccupied or unproductive, that it owns? Implementation of megaprojects is being executed through a partnership between all spheres of government. As the provincial government we’re engaging with national government and municipalities, for them to avail land in their ownership for us to make the creation of post-apartheid cities a reality. We are also negotiating with some private owners for land purchases. Is expropriation without compensation a prospect? Where there is a need to expropriate land for the development of megaprojects, it will be done within the prescripts of relevant legislation and the SA constitution. You appear to be moving a lot faster, a lot more ambitiously and in a much more investor-friendly manner than the Zuma government. It seems further to differentiate the Gauteng provincial government under ANC Gauteng. Would you see it similarly? Our approach to human settlements is aligned with the national government’s vision on the creation of integrated large human settlements. What we’re doing should be viewed as part of a national effort to help create jobs, encourage smaller businesses and restore the dignity of our people through the provision of decent shelter. • This article, by Today’s Trustee editorial director Allan Greenblo, is the cover story in the latest edition of the magazine, mainly for principal officers and trustees of retirement funds.