It was always going to be a tall order, expecting Brian Joffe to walk away from Bidvest, the bold conglomerate&nbsp;he founded, and step meekly into retirement.So revelations last week that he hasn t been able to resist the deal-making bug, and will list a new "lifestyle investment" company called Long4Life on the JSE this week, weren t entirely surprising. As a testament to the esteem in which Joffe is held, his start-up has already raised R2bn of funding, including money from Standard Bank and Investec.Surprisingly, in an interview with the Financial Mail this week, he said he had actually planned to take it easy once he left Bidvest last year, after 28 years."Before I retired from Bidvest, I really was intent on doing nothing, to be honest. But time erodes that kind of enthusiasm," says Joffe, looking relaxed and tanned. The seed for his new business was planted on a cruise to Alaska last August.Though he relinquished his role as CEO of Bidvest last May, he still held an executive role in food services company Bidcorp (which was spun out from Bidvest two years ago). But that ends in June, when he will become a nonexecutive director."I don t think chief executives are forever," he says. "One needs to have different challenges in life, you get stale. It doesn t matter who you are."I always promised myself I wouldn t hand over on my deathbed. I wanted to hand over in my lifetime and watch the success of the business continue."He won t be going the route of becoming a "professional nonexecutive director" on a lot of boards."To me, that s not a proactive kind of thing," he says. "I want to build something. I m not looking to preserve anything; I want to see people grow. I want to see people around me, happy people, and enthusiastic people. People who re going to look to tomorrow rather than monitor what other people are doing. I don t want to be a prefect."Long4Life will focus on "lifestyle investments" in areas like education, restaurants, sports, the outdoors, beauty and retirement in SA initially, and then globally.It is already in discussions to buy Sorbet, the popular beauty store brand, for a maximum price of R130m. And the plan is also to look for turnarounds, nonperforming assets that can be fixed.Joffe says before he invests, he ll look for a few characteristics: a proven track record, strong cash flow, market-leading brands, capital-light businesses, attractive growth prospects, and an experienced and entrepreneurial management team.So who will his customer base be? The plan is to target the baby boomers spending huge amounts on aspirational assets.The fact that Joffe raised R2bn for Long4Life, even though it s basically a one-man business at the moment, shows he remains a rock star in deal-making circles. He s been likened to General Electric s Jack Welch.Joffe started Bidvest in the late 1980s and when he retired, the values of the two companies (Bidvest and Bidcorp) were R140bn.Everyone has a story about Joffe the deal maker, the guy who cheekily offered 1c/share less than the 37c/share that the independent advisers deemed "fair and reasonable" for Bidvest s 2004 buyout of McCarthy.These all add to the legend of a man painted as ruthless; as strategic as a chess grandmaster; fastidious about the details; a man who can identify poorly performing assets with potential and turn them around. And yet, once in charge, he lets his companies run independently and separately.He takes no prisoners. Ask Adcock Ingram, where a feisty battle a few years ago ended with Joffe outflanking Chilean CFR Pharmaceuticals for control of the pharmaceutical firm, entirely due to a savvy strategy.Despite all this, on the eve of his venture Joffe says he feels "a bit of trepidation, a bit of nerves. I don t want to get ahead of myself".The name itself, Long4Life, suggests a youth venture, rather than one started by someone creeping up on 70 years of age."I m very young at heart," Joffe counters. "In years gone by, 70 may have been old but in today s years it s not all that bad. Look at people like Warren Buffett. I m not saying I m anywhere near his league he s still operating at 86."Of course, Joffe has started from scratch before. In the 1970s, he bought a pet-food business, which he later sold for US$1m. He and his wife then headed to the US, where he played golf every day. He returned to SA in 1982, and did various jobs before buying Chipkins, which became the foundation for Bidvest."I m an entrepreneurial type and if opportunities arise that don t fit exactly within that definition, maybe I ll do that too. But I m not doing mining and I m not doing banking. I know nothing about mining and I know very little about deposit-taking," he says.Long4Life started with R600m in capital R500m from Investec and Standard Bank, and R100m from Joffe. "Then it gained some traction and we now have R2bn, probably more than I would have liked," he says.In an ideal world, Joffe wouldn t want to list Long4Life on the JSE, but he says the stock market is the best route, as people prefer to sell their businesses to a listed entity. "It s the same model as Bidvest," he says.It isn t great timing, though. The listing on the JSE takes place four days after S&amp;P downgraded SA, based on President Jacob Zuma s baffling cabinet reshuffle. And it will be on the same day that protests are planned against Zuma s reshuffle.Joffe says 1988, when he formed Bidvest, wasn t an ideal time either, during the last days of PW Botha s despotic apartheid regime.He adds: "I m not happy with the politics. The country is being abused and that s not the SA way and not the way of the population. But opportunity arises in dark times, in volatile times. From an economic point of view, who knows, it might create possibilities."And Joffe s view on Zuma? "The president needs to know he has abused SA and that s not the SA way ... we as South Africans need to make sure we have the best possible government because we have one of the biggest challenges in the world because of our history."Will he do anything different this time around?"Maybe own a bit more than I did," he says. As it stands, Joffe owns about 1% of Bidvest, and he will have just over 6% of the new venture. Empowerment group Brimstone will own a 9.88% stake in Long4Life.Is his family pleased he s heading back to work? "My wife is very excited that she doesn t have to meet me for lunch on Fridays any more," he says.Nor will he be wearing a tie. "Ties are for bankers when you owe them money; in this instance we won t owe the bankers money."