The FM said: While much has been written about Ahmed Kathrada, there are three books worth noting if you want to know more on his life.Could our schools and universities please put on lecture series about the greatest South Africans? Part of not knowing who we are, where we have come from and where we can go is about not knowing who sacrificed to get us to this point and how much they gave and who will take us into the future. As a society things were kept from us: to protect us when we were young, to brainwash us when we were older and should have known better. There are untold stories that would change our perceptions, attitudes, value systems, humility, honour and integrity. Let us focus on the country we can be, not on what we were or are today! David FinchamThe FM said: As sports minister, Fikile Mbalula was better known as Razzmatazz than for bringing home any medals. As the new minister of police, he should guard against shooting his mouth off as he did at his welcoming parade, when he told officers to "fight fire with fire" and "shoot back, don t retreat".[Mbalula is a] complete muppet. He could barely keep sports teams together how is he going to do any good with the police. They risk their lives every day. Isn t this what we are fighting public figures being influenced on where or when to act? If so, how s this different from state capture? Quinton ThrussellWhat did he do for sport? What expertise does he bring to the police force? Vanzylx JoziThis guy is a compromised idiot full of hot air. He hasn t achieved anything wherever he s been, and he s in protected employment. He would never get a job in civil society [he s an] absolute clown. He embarrassed the police officers listening to him. He represents the new ANC. Madiba would be embarrassed as well. Craig JonesThe FM said: Within a short time, a family of foreign traders has gone from running a computer dealership to running our country.Investigative journalists should investigate the Sahara computer deal with government. I was working in government at the time. The instruction came from treasury that all computer equipment had to be procured from Sahara, despite higher prices and lower specs than those of existing suppliers. Brian Amery