SA s tourism sector broke records last year, with the number of arrivals jumping 12.8% to a little over 10m. But while this seems impressive, it is far short of the potential for a sector earmarked by government as a key driver of growth and employment."I estimate SA could be doing 20% better in terms of foreign tourist numbers," says David Frost, CEO of the Southern Africa Tourism Services Association.The crucial measure of success is the ability to attract overseas tourists. They account for most of the big spending and, on paper at least, SA did well last year to lift this number 17.9% to 2.254m.In reality, however, this was driven largely by the weak rand and the relaxation of silly regulations rather than a more savvy tourism strategy.Since 2015, the rand has weakened from about R11.70/$ to about R13.87 now though it did recover from a horror fall to about R16.86 owing to Nenegate.In 2015, tourism numbers also fell 4.8% thanks to draconian visa regulations imposed by former home affairs minister Malusi Gigaba, who demanded that visitors produce birth certificates for their children. Mercifully, that ruling has since been relaxed.A better sense of 2016 s overseas tourist numbers is gained by comparing them with those for 2014. Here the industry seemingly performed well, with growth over the two years at 12.2%.Still, Otto de Vries, CEO of the Association of Southern African Travel Agents, is not impressed. "Growth could have been far higher if not for home affairs obstacles," he says.His point is borne out by the performance of Australia s inbound tourist sector between 2014 and 2016. That country lifted foreign tourist numbers by 19.7% over the two years to 6.9m.New Zealand put in an even stronger showing, lifting foreign tourist numbers excluding those from Australia by 30.4% to 2.1m between 2014 and 2016.The weaker rand should have provided a far bigger tailwind for overseas arrivals last year. This benefit was eroded, to some extent, as the rand gained back some of its lost value until President Jacob Zuma s cabinet reshuffle.Lee-Anne Bac, a director of advisory services at Grant Thornton, believes SA felt the impact of the rand s strengthening and points to overseas tourist arrival growth slowing to 13.1% in November and 10.7% in December.Frost explains that most bookings to SA are made through tour agencies that hedge their currency risk forward for six to 12 months. When those hedges unwind, tour operators face a 25%-30% rise in overall costs, he says."We have seen a pushback from European tour operators on bookings [for] late 2017 and into 2018," says Johan Groenewald, CEO of travel group Royal African Discoveries.SA s tourism industry needs all the help it can get. The department of home affairs is well placed to provide this help but its track record doesn t bode well.The department made it somewhat easier for Chinese and Indian visitors to obtain visas. However, still hanging in the air is the matter of unabridged birth certificates for children under 18 entering or leaving SA. The issue is fraught with confusion for foreigners. Home affairs does not specifically require a birth certificate any more, but "strongly advises" that one is provided."More certainty on wording is needed," says De Vries.As matters now stand, travellers heading for SA with children who arrive at a check-in counter without a birth certificate are routinely turned away by airline staff."Airlines will not take the risk of having to foot the cost of sending people refused entry into SA home," says De Vries.The situation comes at a huge cost. "About 13,000 people heading for SA were turned away at [foreign] airports last year," says Frost. "It is a public relations disaster for SA."Gigaba s intention with these rules was to stamp out child trafficking. But it s not as if trafficking isn t a concern to other countries."They use other, more precise, methods such as passenger profiling in co-operation with Interpol," says Frost. "It s time for home affairs to wake up and operate like the rest of the world."With GDP growth likely to be lower than 1% and foreign investors unlikely to be rushing to invest in a junk-rated country, tourism is one of the few ways the country can claw back lost ground.In particular, tourist mecca Cape Town attracted 84,493 overseas tourists in December 2016 alone a third of all offshore arrivals and a 29% rise over December 2015.Cape Town s tourist growth sparked something of a new hotel boom in the city s central business district too. Tsogo Sun is building a 600-room hotel in the city for R680m, while Marriott is to build three hotels with a combined capacity of 539 rooms. "Investment is the tourism story," says Frost. "It creates construction jobs and, when completed, projects create jobs in the hospitality sector."Welcome as Cape Town s tourism-driven hotel expansion is, SA should aspire to far greater things as developments in Australia show. In that country s pipeline are 228 new hotels, set to add 34,700 rooms at a total cost of A$8bn (R80bn), reports Tourism Accommodation Australia. It is, says the organisation, "in response to [huge] growth in tourism demand".What it means: Tourist numbers have been affected by home affairs visa requirements for children