Faced by huge uncertainty, SA s bond market is not the most comfortable place to be right now. This makes it a time to consider other options.For many investors, money market funds will probably spring first to mind. They are not a bad alternative. Free of any risk of capital loss, they are on average yielding around 8.2% gross and 7.7% after costs.This compares with the after-cost yields of about 8.5%-8.75% that are offered by bond unit trust and exchange traded funds.The alternatives to bond funds do not end at money market funds. Income funds provide a big yield uplift with a fractional increase in risk."Income funds are the preferred strategy at present," says Henk Viljoen, Stanlib s head of fixed income and co-manager of the R23bn Stanlib Income Fund.The typical income fund is now yielding a net 8.5%-8.6% after costs, says Viljoen.Floating rate notes (FRN), mostly issued by the six major banks, are used extensively and provide a yield uplift comparable to money market funds. The Association of Saving &amp; Investment SA emphasises that unlike bonds, "FRNs are almost immune to interest rate risk."There is another alternative to SA bond funds, namely offshore bond funds, of which a number are available locally. But those looking for a high-income yield from an offshore fund while developed market bond yields are still at ultra-low levels are in for a big disappointment.An example is the Old Mutual Global Bond Feeder Fund, which has as its dominant asset the Old Mutual Global Aggregate Bond Fund. According to the feeder fund s latest fact sheet, the gross yield on offer is 2.05%. And there is not much over after an annual management fee of 1.14% is deducted.A more generous yield is on offer from Stanlib Global Bond, available through a local feeder fund. Yield uplift to the most recently disclosed 4.3% was achieved through a 36% exposure to corporate bonds.As with any bond investment there is potential for capital gain if yields fall. There is also the potential of a capital loss if interest rates rise.Bond investors have by and large had it all their own way since the early 1980s, when the global benchmark 10-year US government bond yield peaked at over 15%. It is now at 2.25%.The lower turning point could be precipitated by an upturn in inflation. The world s largest asset management group, BlackRock, believes it will be.BlackRock notes in its second quarter market outlook: "Strengthening reflation reinforces our view that we have seen the bottom in bond yields globally after a multidecade slide."