Driving tourists through a game reserve the other day, the ranger spotted a crocodile to the vehicle s left. So intently were passengers studying it that they didn t notice a hyena approaching from the right.Much the same can be said about the present attention on the ministerial changes at national treasury. If it can now be subjected to state capture , then the Public Investment Corp (PIC) can be too. Be worried be very worried because there s an aspect that has yet to hit home significantly. It s in the replacement of deputy finance minister Mcebesi Jonas by Sfiso Buthelezi.There s a difference between them in that Jonas fell out of favour with President Jacob Zuma. There s no difference between them in that the position of deputy finance minister automatically carries with it the position of PIC board chair. There could be a difference between them, still to be seen, in the execution of the PIC role.Jonas made waves. An outstanding example was his insistence that the PIC, consistent with its self-proclaimed commitment to transparency, disclose to the parliamentary standing committee on finance the details of its investment in the unlisted Independent News &amp; Media SA, controlled by Iqbal Surv , in which the Gupta family also claimed a stake.However, the latest PIC annual report (for the year to end-March 2016) provides no further information. Neither does it offer an update on the fate of the PIC s 14% stake in cellphone operator Vodacom, for which the PIC paid R25bn and which was supposed to be made available for sale to black investors who could raise the funds without PIC assistance.The point is that, simply by virtue of its massive size, there are nooks and crannies in the PIC s diversified investment portfolio that escape specific mention in the annual report. To ask questions about them is not necessarily to have them answered. It happens when the PIC claims client confidentiality over its unlisted investments, leaving much that can evade public scrutiny.This aspect of the PIC portfolio is itself huge. At end-March 2016 the unlisted investments totalled R44.6bn, with another R38.5bn in approvals.Whereas the PIC says stock-market listed investments must be investment grade , by their nature the unlisted investments aren t graded. They have a developmental focus, partially to encourage black-owned smaller and medium-size enterprises.That, of course, is commendable provided that implementation is free of political intervention. And that, in turn, is a function of governance; as much as it was under Jonas, so it will be under Buthelezi. The constant, to date, is that CEO Dan Matjila remains in office, albeit under a new boss.The PIC is a wholly state-owned entity. The shareholder representative, who sets the strategic objectives, is the deputy finance minister. Nonexecutive directors, styled as independent, are appointed by Zuma s cabinet. Top annual remuneration is more than R700,000.In its most recent financial year, the PIC held R1.9trillion in assets under management. This equated to some 45% of SA s GDP. Not only is the PIC by far SA s largest asset manager, but it also carries persuasive influence to the extent that its behaviour is commensurate with its pride as an activist investor on the major SA corporates in which it is frequently the largest single shareholder.More than this, in its developmental role the PIC can carry as much weight as treasury itself. Arguably, the PIC is SA s most potent arm for implementation of the developmental policy integral to radical economic transformation that s become subject to interpretation by its new chair.There is a constraint. It s in the responsibility of the PIC to achieve on its investments portfolio the returns that will enable members of its clients state retirement funds to receive benefits, inclusive of discretionary annual pension increments, and to avoid calling on taxpayers should pension promises fall short.The Government Employees Pension Fund (GEPF), which has 1.7m members, accounts for almost 90% of the PIC s assets under management. Being a defined-benefit fund, in the last resort the state (i.e. the taxpayer) as employer underwrites the GEPF s pension promise. At the GEPF board level, half the trustees are employer-nominated and half are nominated or elected by employees.Whether representative of employer or employees, either way they re trustees. It means that their fiduciary duty is solely to the fund for the interests of its members.As such, they re beholden to watch Buthelezi like a hawk. And the 1.7m fund members, as well as taxpayers, aren t precluded from watching him similarly.* Greenblo is editorial director of Today s Trustee, a quarterly magazine mainly for principal officers and trustees of retirement funds