We question James AH Campbell, MD, Botswana Diamonds PlcWhat s the most interesting thing about you that people don t know?People see me mainly as a diamond man, but I chair both the Joburg Jo burg Ballet and Common Purpose SA a leadership development organisation. I firmly believe that one has to give back to society using your God given God-given talents. Interestingly, both have cash flow issues from time to time, which is not uncommon in the mining "junior" world I live in.How do you handle stress?.I run at least three times a week, try and to eat healthily and sleep at least seven hours a night. This was absolutely vital in my last 18- months or so at Rockwell where the financial and production pressure was unyielding.What is your biggest indulgence?A glass or two of red wine in the evening and probably too much cheese, which I have with my wine!Which phrase or word do you most overuse?""I probably use two: "stuck like a broken record" and "history always repeats itself". My mother is a historian and at a young age she ingrained in me to learn the value of learning the lessons of history in its broadest possible sense.Where were you when Nelson Mandela was released from prison?I was living in Centurion as a diamond exploration geologist working for De Beers. I vividly recall watching history in the making on television.Who is your favourite hero of fiction?Captain Jean Luc Jean-Luc Picard of the Starship Enterprise (Star Trek).What s the worst airport you ve been in?, and this is what I dislike most about JFKLaGuardia, La Guadia, New York. For a developed country, this airport is simply appalling.What is the one investment you wish you had made, or made earlier?Naspers. What s your one top tip for doing a deal?FromAim for a win-win deal by doing your homework and putting yourself in the other persons person s shoes.What do you consider the most overrated virtue?Confidence. The corollary of this is the absence of humility.Tell us about a hidden gem in Jo burg/Cape Town/Durban that not many people know about?Mikes Mike s Kitchen in Parktown, Joburg Jo burg. dinner.Is there such a thing as "enough money", and, if so, how much is it?Yes. But it depends on what you want to do with it. There is no value in money for money s sake. We all leave this earth with nothing. I believe it is important to leave a legacy, whether it be in creating new business or developing leaders.What is your biggest regret?Not being able to buyout buy out De Beers on the AK6/Karowe project under the African Diamonds plc Plc banner. This project was considered uneconomic by De Beers and the African Diamonds team firmly believed it would be a world class world-class mine, which it is. However, I reflect that African Diamonds shareholders did very well out of the venture and the team developed the innovative technical solution which paved the way for it to be an economic success.When and where were you happiest?When I was Nicky Oppenheimer s Personal Assistant personal assistant. I got to meet Harry Oppenheimer and work with a superb group of business and technical leaders who have chiefly shaped who I am today.