The ANC Youth League has a long history as “kingmakers” of its mother body, the ANC. In 1949, Nelson Mandela and Walter Sisulu were among the Youth League leaders who engineered the election of James Moroka as ANC president to succeed AB Xuma, whom they considered too passive. In 2007 the league — under Julius Malema, now head of the Economic Freedom Fighters — was instrumental in Jacob Zuma pushing out then-president Thabo Mbeki at Polokwane. But whether the Youth League still has such influence remains to be seen. It was one of the first structures, along with the ANC Women’s League, to declare the party “ready” for a woman president to succeed Zuma. More recently, Zuma said the same thing, which sounded like an endorsement of African Union commission chair Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, his ex-wife. There are 11 months until the ANC’s next elective conference and already its various structures are punting their favourites, against the party’s wishes. The Youth League, seen as close allies of the influential “premier league” which backs Zuma, was expected to support Dlamini-Zuma. But this no longer seems cut and dried since the curious statement by its leader, Collen Maine, this month that the league could endorse a “shock” candidate — that is, neither Dlamini-Zuma nor deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa, the front-runners. The Youth League now seems divided. Some elements, like its KwaZulu Natal wing, are insisting on Dlamini-Zuma but others seem to be looking elsewhere. The influential, pro-Zuma premier league (the premiers of Free State, North West and Mpumalanga), is apparently similarly divided. A “Youth League list” has surfaced, on which Free State ANC chairman Ace Magashule is at the helm of the party. Also on the list is Baleka Mbete, ANC chair and national assembly speaker. Mbete, however, also has her sights set on becoming ANC president. She told the Sunday Times this month that she had been “approached by many” party structures to run and‚ after agonising over it‚ had decided to make herself available. But she has since backtracked somewhat, saying in a Radio 702 interview the matter was “not yet formally on the table”. Mbete this week told the Financial Mail she would no longer comment on the matter because the succession debate had not been formally opened. This comes after last week’s meeting of the ANC’s national working committee called on members and structures to desist from naming their preferred candidates. However, Mbete says she is all for a woman as the next leader. “I believe for the ANC ... the time has come for us to seriously listen and actually practise what the Women’s League has put on the table, and that is the principle of saying we are convinced that this is yet another area, the ANC, after a century, we are ready to lead and to be an example,” she said. Despite implying that the Youth League would not be backing Dlamini-Zuma, Maine says it is also committed to the principle of a woman leading the ANC. “We maintain the position but the difficulty is we are not able to ... get into details on that particular position because the ANC has said we must not discuss this.” The league would make known its preferred candidate once the succession debate officially opens, he added. The ANC Women’s League was the first this year to open up the succession debate, when it publicly endorsed Dlamini-Zuma on the eve of the party’s 105th anniversary rally at Orlando Stadium, Soweto, on January 8. It did so knowing that the national executive committee had resolved to bar its structures and affiliated bodies from making such pronouncements. ANC secretary-general Gwede Mantashe reportedly blamed union ally Cosatu for unofficially kicking off the contest late last year by publicly endorsing Ramaphosa. Despite being chastised by the ANC, the Women’s League has remained unapologetic about wanting Dlamini-Zuma. It has been steadfast in its decision that a woman should take over the party, which before 1943 did not allow women to join. Women’s League secretary-general Meokgo Matuba says: “The success of [the Women’s League] in realising a goal of having the first ANC female president will be a success for women structures across the globe and motivation for them to continue with an agenda of having a world that is not patriarchal.” However, the league has been quiet on Mbete, who served as SA deputy president from 2008 to 2009 under Kgalema Motlanthe after Mbeki’s recall. It’s yet to be seen if Mbete enjoys any support in the Women’s League or any other structure of the party.