Apparently undaunted by the dark clouds gathering over SA’s social welfare system, social development minister Bathabile Dlamini bailed out of this week’s scheduled portfolio committee meeting in parliament. Dlamini’s decision comes despite the fact that even ANC members of the portfolio committee are beginning to take seriously the fact that the contract given to incumbent grant distribution agent Net1 expires on April1. Though government has spoken boldly about how it plans to take over the payment of more than R130bn/year to 17m South Africans, there is no plan in place for this to actually happen. With tensions rising, Dlamini was meant to brief parliament on the progress made in transferring the payment system to the SA Social Security Agency (Sassa) this week. However, an SMS was sent to committee members on Sunday evening informing them that Wednesday’s meeting “has now been postponed to a later date”. No later date was suggested. The minister, committee chair Rosemary Capa and Sassa CEO Thokozani Magwaza could not attend the portfolio meeting on January 25 because they would be attending the ANC lekgotla scheduled for January 27-29. No explanation was given for why the minister couldn’t make it to the briefing and the lekgotla two days later. DA chief whip John Steenhuisen says it is of great concern that the CEO of Sassa is attending the lekgotla. “The blurring of the state-party divide has become a feature of the ANC in recent years,” he says. The unexpected development prompted DA committee member Lindy Wilson to ask: “How can the ANC lekgotla be more important than the livelihoods of 17m South Africans?” The real reason might be found further afield. The Financial Mail was unable to confirm subsequent reports that Dlamini, who is also head of the ANC Women’s League, had headed off to attend an AU gender summit in Ethiopia where outgoing AU commission chair Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma was due to give the keynote address. Dlamini-Zuma has been nominated by the Women’s League to replace President Jacob Zuma as ANC head. The ANC Women’s League is also planning to open a desk in the Ethiopian capital this week. With the political head “Awol”, fears are escalating that government has no workable plan for grant distributions from April, but is unconcerned by a deadline that looms larger with every passing day. In this vacuum, NGOs, including the Black Sash, Legal Resources Centre (LRC) and Corruption Watch, are pushing for answers. The LRC’s Michael Tsele wrote to Sassa in January “urgently seeking clarity on what arrangements have been made by Sassa” to ensure grant payments are not disrupted. Tsele has not yet received a response (he did give Sassa until January 27 to do so). Tsele says the issue is of keen interest to an LRC client, the Centre for Child Law, a public-interest organisation that works for children’s rights. He says neither Sassa nor Dlamini’s department have the authority to extend the contract with Net1 UEPS (which was deemed “invalid” by the constitutional court), unless the court approves the move. “A new contract for the payment of social grants cannot be awarded unless the rigorous procurement requirements have been met,” he wrote in the letter. “Any deviation from the procurement regulations on the basis of urgency will likely be invalidated as the urgency was created by Sassa itself.” Wilson also fired off a lengthy list of questions to Sassa, based on its “request for information” presentation on January 13. Though Sassa promised to respond to these questions by January 24, there has been no sign of any answers. She echoed Tsele’s concerns about whether the constitutional court has approved any new tender. Concerns have also been raised that external consultants are now involved, and may be in a position to direct the award of any new tender to “favoured parties”. Wilson asked for information on a new “work stream group” that is supposedly driving this new tender: “Is the work stream group and leader of the team the same members who drew up the request for proposals when Net1/CPS [Cash Paymaster Services] were awarded the contract?” Given that the court ruled that tender was “invalid”, given the numerous problems in its awarding, it’s a valid concern. But with Dlamini apparently more concerned about ANC politics, answers remain elusive.