If someone came to you tomorrow with R100m to invest in just one company, which would it be? Unibail-Rodamco. The company has great management and owns some of the best malls in major cities across Western Europe. It’s been ahead of the game, having cleaned up its portfolio and sold less dominant malls. It stands out as being well-positioned to withstand the rise in e-commerce, and it continues to adjust, adapting to new shopping patterns or trends. Its sales, rentals, footfall, earnings and valuations continue to grow. Its debt is well-managed and it has a good development pipeline. Which talent would you most like to have? To be multilingual. I would like to speak Mandarin, Arabic, Spanish, French, German, Russian, Japanese and Swahili. It would make it easy when travelling for business or leisure. If you found a lottery ticket tomorrow that had won US$100m, what would you do? I’d donate 25% to an orphanage, give 25% to my family and extended family, set aside 10% for travelling to countries that I’ve not been to, and invest 40% in Stanlib’s suite of local, developed and emerging-market property funds. What was your worst investment mistake? Maybe cars, but I absolutely enjoy the driving satisfaction. Unfortunately, it’s difficult to attach a monetary value to that. On what occasion do you lie? I always say there’s room for dessert. What’s your favourite song? "Fast Car" by Tracy Chapman. It’s a song about hardship, making a hard decision to chase a dream and hope for a better life. If you could fix one thing in SA today, what would it be? Finding the best way for the country to work with the rest of the African continent, as Germany does in Europe. The continent continues to lag behind the world, but it offers immense economic opportunities. For example, sub-Saharan Africa’s population of 1bn makes up about 13% of the global population, yet our share of the world economy is only 2%. What is your greatest extravagance? Travelling to Formula One Grands Prix. It’s not just about racing; I learn more, see new opportunities or trends, enjoy the local cuisine, learn about other cultures, meet people and make new friends. I consider travelling an investment. Apple or Samsung (or Nokia)? Apple. I must admit I am tempted to switch to Samsung because it has a better camera. I love photography. Name a place you’ve been to that lived up to the hype? I’d say Milan, Italy. I love motorsport, art, design, fashion and gastronomy. Milan offers the best combination of all of these.