In the course of these commemorations [of the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution], the SACP noted the absolutely central and selfless role played by the Soviet Union in the struggle against colonialism and white minority rule in Southern Africa." — SACP annual augmented central committee statement, December 3 2017. Colonialism featured prominently in 2017 as a great historical evil and, remarkably, the argument goes, as a very real contemporary threat. So ubiquitous is the idea, in general terms it seemed to enjoy more prominence than even apartheid itself, long since rebranded as "colonialism of a special type". Helen Zille did most to heighten debate on the subject. In a series of clumsy tweets she argued in March that some benefit stood to be accrued from the legacy of colonialism, infrastructure-wise, if only one were able to look past all the accompanying pain. Unfortunately, no-one was willing to look past the pain, both real and imagined, and the public mind melted down into goo in response. The SA zeitgeist, an entity typically controlled by a disturbingly small number of people, has it that colonialism lives and breathes today. We are told it infects our institutions, corrupts our culture, alienates and divides. The idea has thus been imbued with much power— mostly through fear. Certainly, much more than it deserves. Political parties have shaped much of their communication around colonialism as a result. The ANC, which operates more in the past than the present, and definitely not the future, often evokes the legacy of colonialism to justify its existence. The EFF gleefully taps into the latent hostility and anger that attaches to colonialism as and when necessary. And the DA, painted as a surrogate for what it represents by its enemies, regularly pays guilt-ridden homage to colonialism as a destructive force, in the same manner one services a debt. Sociologically speaking, this is how a hegemonic idea operates. It marks out a set of unseen parameters in the public mind. It assumes the status of incontestable truth. Then, once established as common cause, it turns on anyone who steps outside its boundaries or contests its essential character. In this way, often through little more than brute pressure, it self-replicates and thrives. To address it directly, one must offer up the appropriate reparations first. One must rhetorically bow before talking to the conceptual king. And, even then, never look him directly in the eyes. All of this is interesting enough. But SA is, if anything, myopic. If it is evil on a grand scale one is interested in, history has much besides colonialism in its repertoire. Not all of it is relevant to SA, but some of it is — the history of communist thought, for example. The SACP, which recently decided formally to stand for direct election after decades of syphoning informal power off the ANC in parasitic fashion, surely has a few questions it should answer on this front. Likewise, you would think, the ANC — given the ideological deference it demonstrates before socialism and socialist regimes. The same can be said of the EFF, which cites the likes of Lenin and Mao as the source of great inspiration. Historically, quite where communist thought ends and the horror begins is difficult to say. But that the horror manifested — in places such as China, the Soviet Union, across the Caucasus and in Cambodia — there is no doubt. Millions upon millions were tortured, starved, brutalised and annihilated, all in the name of some feigned socialist ideal. But there is no onus on the SA custodians of socialist thought even to acknowledge their collective history, never mind express any remorse for it. Here’s a thought: when was the last time you heard Blade Nzimande, Jeremy Cronin or Julius Malema put into a moral vice on radio or social media, and the pressure ratcheted up in the way it is for those seeming apologists for colonialism? Why is demonstrable guilt and remorse never demanded by the zeitgeist with regard to this particular ideological legacy? You’ve never heard it, because it’s never happened. How is it that the SACP can stand for election with absolutely no pressure on it to denounce the atrocities committed in the name of socialism? Why is it that the endlessly violent global history of communist thought carries no moral weight in SA? The brutal truth is that morality in SA today is a political exercise, not a philosophical one. We feign ethical concern not because we are interested in right or wrong, or good or bad, but because such conversations are substitutes for far baser instincts: anger and resentment in particular. Likewise, their pursuit serves a political end, not an ethical one. Ours is an amoral universe. Political power determines right and wrong, and circumstances dictate ethics. And so the SACP, advocating an ideology that has decimated nations and people alike, can stand for election, unburdened by any moral obligation to truth. Not just stand, but do so on a platform that would have the party stridently opposed to colonialism and committed to the eradication of its legacy. The centenary of the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution has now come and gone. The likes of the SACP offered up the appropriate tribute. Truly, life has never been better for that party. There it sits, judging all and sundry, like the man on death row who, through inexplicable circumstances, now finds himself presiding over the court.