In a world where “alternative facts” and fake news are undermining the trustworthiness of the media, more and more readers are turning to our trusted media brands to provide them with accurate, well-informed insight into current affairs. BusinessLIVE, the one-stop business news website launched late last year by Times Media, publishes great writing from Business Day, the Financial Mail, the Sunday Times’s Business Times and Rand Daily Mail all in one place, with online-only content published round the clock. Some exclusive news articles, columns and commentary on BusinessLIVE are labelled “Premium”. Until now, readers simply had to register on the website to read those articles, but from mid-February they will be available only to BusinessLIVE Premium subscribers. There is good news, though. All existing subscribers to the print editions of Business Day and Financial Mail will have free access to this premium package. If you are a print subscriber, all you have to do is click on a BusinessLIVE article marked “Premium” and fill in the quick and easy registration form using the same email address you used when you first subscribed. You’ll then automatically have access to BL Premium. If you are not a print subscriber, you’ll be asked to pay from as little as R4 a day – that’s R120 a month – to get full access. That’s far less than you’d pay for a single newspaper or a cup of coffee. Even better, you get your first month for R10 when you sign up. BL Premium will bring you the top columnists from our business titles – including writers such as Justice Malala, Jonathan Jansen, Tim Cohen, Steven Friedman, Rob Rose, Ron Derby and Aubrey Matshiqi – and the top news. This will include exclusive access to the full Business Day front-page lead every day, the Financial Mail cover story every week and the best news from the Business Times. Included in that package is a daily selection of the best international business writing from the Financial Times and in-depth financial data from trusted provider Morningstar. The BL Premium Plus package, at R349 a month, will give you access to all the above plus full digital access to The Wall Street Journal every day and e-editions (online copies of the print products) of Business Day and the Financial Mail. Special arrangements will be made for corporate subscribers and there will be different rates and packages on offer. We hope you will join us on our journey to understand and explain the increasingly complex world in which we live. Questions or comments? Email us at feedback@businesslive.co.za.