The Fugard Theatre Bioscope’s 2017 world arts cinema season opened with a sobering Sunday screening of The Threepenny Opera, the parody of traditional opera and operetta by Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht. The musical theatre creation, featuring “filthy language and immoral behaviour” by the German composer and poet-playwright, received mixed reviews at the National Opera Theatre in London last year. “Whether you like the productions or not is not actually the issue,” says Greg Karvellas, Fugard Theatre general manager and resident director. “What’s so special about this season and our little bioscope that we run here is that we give audiences the opportunity to watch world-class international productions in a beautiful theatre.” The season has grown almost sixfold from the first screenings of eight films in 2011. Karvellas has curated a programme of theatre, opera and ballet productions that can be enjoyed in this special atmosphere. Events start with a glass of champagne or a coffee at the rooftop bar, weather permitting, almost every week throughout the year. The Bioscope is in the heart of District Six, on the corner of Harrington and Caledon streets, in Cape Town, and there is plenty of parking nearby. The screenings are again made possible by the Fugard’s partnership with the Royal Opera House, the Royal Ballet, the Bolshoi Ballet and the UK’s National Theatre as well as new collaborations with the Salzburg Festival Opera, The Globe and the Royal Shakespeare Company. It’s the kind of entertainment offering that makes you want to book for yourself almost every Sunday at 11am for the foreseeable future. Films are screened on a full-size high-definition cinema screen with 7.1 Dolby Digital surround-sound system to such great effect that theatregoers are often inspired to clap when the movie audience does. You’re made to feel that you’re in that theatre. Karvellas recommends the National Theatre Live series, such as No Man’s Land, featuring Ian McKellen and Patrick Stewart, or its staging of Peter Shaffer’s Mozart play, Amadeus, starring Lucian Msamati of Luther and Game of Thrones. There’s also the Salzburg Festival Opera productions of Beethoven’s Fidelio and Cavalleria Rusticana and the Royal Shakespeare Company’s performances of the rarely performed romance Cymbeline, and King Lear, starring Antony Sher. Later on this year, the Fugard Bioscope will screen The Globe’s productions of Richard II, The Merchant of Venice and Measure for Measure. Also on offer will be the Royal Opera House productions of Puccini’s Madama Butterfly with soprano Ermonela Jaho and Otello, directed by Olivier Award-winning Keith Warner. I have seen superb ballet productions in previous seasons and this year looks to be no different. The Bolshoi Ballet’s Swan Lake and Sleeping Beauty are not-to-be-missed classics while George Balanchine’s Woolf Works by the Royal Ballet is also in the line-up. “This is the first revival of Wayne McGregor’s critically acclaimed ballet triptych, inspired by the works of Virginia Woolf,” says Karvellas. It’s best to book early, as tickets are limited and sell fast. Details at www.thefugard.com. Tickets cost R100 through Computicket, online at www.computicket.com, at Shoprite Checkers outlets and at the Fugard Theatre box office at (021) 461-4554. The foyer bar is open from 10am.