Nelson Mandela University (NMU) Business School hopes a new identity will strengthen the brand and extend its reach beyond its Eastern Cape heartland. After its founding in 2005, Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University never enjoyed the clear geographical identity of its predecessor, the University of Port Elizabeth. Now university authorities, with the acquiescence of the local council, have decided to drop "Metropolitan" from the name and trade exclusively on the name of SA’s first black president. The change takes effect this week. Hence the abbreviated title of the business school. "We want to tie our identity directly to the Mandela name and all it stands for," says director Randall Jonas. The school is the latest SA institution to have its master of business administration (MBA) programme accredited by the international Association of MBAs. But it has made limited headway beyond the province, either across SA or deeper into Africa. "For us to make inroads beyond here has been very difficult," says Jonas, who succeeded Steve Burgess as director late last year. NMU is one of the few SA business schools without active clients beyond SA’s borders. It has such a client of sorts, the South Sudan government, but students there are caught up in a deadly civil war. "We’d like to think we can resume that contract eventually," says Leon Mouton, head of the school’s leadership academy. Geographical limits are less of an issue for the University of Cape Town’s Graduate School of Business (GSB), which opened a Sandton campus in June. Director Mills Soko says the decision is part of a gradual repositioning of the school. Since taking over last year, he has introduced a more collaborative management style than that of his predecessor, Walter Baets. He has also launched an ambitious bursary scheme aimed mainly at young blacks and begun to increase teaching faculty numbers. He is leading discussions into how the school fell off the Financial Times’ ranking of top international MBAs for the first time in 12 years — a result based on performance before Soko became director. GSB had been the only SA school to make the rankings. GSB’s Sandton move makes it the next-door neighbour to private-sector Regenesys Business School, whose principal, Marko Saravanja, fiercely opposes a system that allows publicly funded university schools to sell services to business. He says because they are effectively underwritten by taxpayers and have access to government education subsidies, university schools distort the executive education and MBA market where they compete with private schools. Yusuf Karodia, principal of the Management College of Southern Africa (Mancosa), echoes: "It perpetuates an elitist system weighted in favour of public universities." One of the main targets of his and Saravanja’s ire is Stellenbosch University Business School, where executive education activities were spun off some years ago into a private company. However, the main university is buying back control from shareholders. CEO Frik Landman says the university recently increased its stake to 55% and is aiming, in the short term, for 63%. He rejects charges that the company is subsidised. "We pay full rent for our premises and we are responsible for all our costs. We pay our way and are not a burden in any sense, on anyone." The premises for which it pays could soon be changing, however. Landman confirms that discussions about moving the school to Stellenbosch from Durbanville are moving forward. "A business case has been developed and possible sites identified. Now the conversation is about finance." He thinks a move is four or five years away. The current site, within easy reach for Cape Town clients, has some advantages, but Landman says: "Wits Business School (WBS) and the Gordon Institute of Business Science (Gibs), being in the heart of the SA economy, give you a particular experience. So does the Cape Town GSB and its Waterfront position. I think we are losing out on the unique experience and aura Stellenbosch provides." Whatever the WBS experience, it’s apparently insufficient to hold the attention of school heads. Steve Bluen, the former SA Breweries executive appointed in early 2014 to restore stability to the school after another prolonged period of underperformance, resigned in March. Alison Sinclair, the school’s administrative head, was named acting director for an interregnum while a permanent successor was found – only to be replaced for another interregnum. Former finance minister Nhlanhla Nene, fired by President Jacob Zuma in late 2015, was appointed on July 1 as interim director. One of his responsibilities will be to help the school find a permanent director. More immediately, his role is to present a reassuring face to the outside world while the search is under way. The school has been through too many directors in recent years to want more upheavals. Having someone of Nene’s stature on board for the next few months will give Wits University time to find the right person. Imraan Valodia, dean of the faculty of commerce, law & management, of which WBS is part, hopes to have someone in place for the start of the 2018 academic year. Nene, who has retired from active politics in favour of the corporate world, will remain with WBS as a visiting academic after a new director is appointed. The North-West University Graduate School of Business & Government Leadership — created in 2016 through the amalgamation of the university’s Potchefstroom and Mafikeng schools — also hopes to have a new director by the start of 2018. Tommy du Plessis, who ran the Potchefstroom school for many years, has been acting director of the merged institution since it was formed. Now the university is understood to have a shortlist of preferred candidates and hopes to start interviews soon. The school is negotiating with the Botswana government to open a campus in the capital, Gaborone. North-West already has three campuses — in Potchefstroom, Mafikeng and Vanderbijlpark — and had hoped to create a fourth in Rustenburg. But Du Plessis says that idea has been canned and Gaborone is the preferred option. Plans by Gibs to run a new Durban school appear to be tied up in corporate red tape. Gibs was asked by the Toyota motor company last year to provide manufacturing-specific education at a planned campus in Umhlanga. The school is meant to open in 2018, but the project is still awaiting formal approval from within the Japan-based Toyota group.