The entrepreneur and marketing expert turned banker has a history of rich experiences, which may help set him up for the top job at Nedbank. Ciko Thomas, Nedbank’s head of retail and business banking, was always ready to take over the post from Philip Wessels, though he spent nearly all his working life in marketing. In the year that he has served in the top banking job, headline earnings grew 11.2% to R4.9bn during the 2016 financial year, "notwithstanding [his] appointment to the role halfway through the year", according to the group’s annual report. "It’s the relative ease of the transition of the leadership of the business from Philip to myself, the support I have had from the 22,000-odd people in the business, and of course the financial outcomes we achieved at the end of the 2016 financial year-end," says Thomas. A scientist by training — he has a BSc in chemistry from the University of Cape Town — Thomas began his career as a graduate marketing trainee at consumer goods company Unilever in Durban, quickly rising to management posts at SA Breweries, Unilever, M-Net and Absa. Perhaps his best known role is as an entrepreneur. Together with three others, he bought the loss-making Joburg City Auto through an entity called Zwavhudi Investment Holdings, the first 100% black-owned BMW dealership in the country, and turned it into a profit making machine. He was also joint-owner of the first black-owned Volkswagen dealership in Johannesburg, earning himself the name "Ciko Dealer", which is his handle on Twitter. He then joined Barloworld as group marketing director for its automotive division. And was personally recruited to join Nedbank in 2010, by former COO Graham Dempster. Following a restructuring of the retail and business bank, Thomas was appointed to lead its consumer banking unit in November of that year. "When I joined Nedbank in 2010, I was clear in my mind that, while I was joining the organisation in a marketing role, my professional development and personal aspirations might move into other parts of the bank’s business," he says. "So I was mentally ready for the potential transition and I was also ready to take advantage of whatever career opportunities [came] my way." Thomas says he is driven by "continuous learning and personal rejuvenation", and views each professional role as a building block towards his full development. "I’ve never seen them as separate and discrete learning or development blocks — [they’re] always constituent building blocks in the development of the fuller person. "This is my own philosophy to personal development." He is still in his 40s, young enough to aim for the group CEO role after Mike Brown, who will reach retirement age in about 10 years. Thomas says this does not matter to him. "My career development has never been shaped by roles per se. I’ve had the privilege of being in roles where I can add value and also learn." When he is not developing himself on a professional level, Thomas enjoys art with his family, including two children below the age of 11.