If there was ever a case of "caveat emptor", this is it: Rio Tinto’s top executives of four years ago are now being pursued for fraud over the disastrous acquisition of Riversdale Mining’s Mozambican coal assets in 2011. Tom Albanese, CEO of Vedanta Resources until August, and Guy Elliott, until recently a nonexecutive director at Shell Global and deputy chairman of SABMiller, are facing huge personal claims and possible disbarment from public office after a US Securities & Exchange Commission (SEC) probe into their roles at Rio Tinto. Rio bought Riversdale — whose two main assets were stakes in the Zululand Anthracite Colliery in SA and the Benga coal project in Tete province, Mozambique — for US$3.9bn. Benga, which had a high proportion of coking coal, used in steelmaking, was looking extremely attractive at a time when prices were soaring. The prices, and the size of the resource, appeared to justify embarking on a remote greenfields project in the middle of an undeveloped area of Mozambique. But logistics proved tricky. After examining the costs and difficulties of using the existing rudimentary rail links to get to the port, Rio Tinto came up with the idea of barging the coal down the Zambezi river. In the end, the company failed to get government approval for the barging plan, effectively stranding the mine. Benga’s neighbour was Vale’s huge Moatize coal mine. Vale has recently sold it to Mitsui, together with its 70% stake in the Nacala coal corridor — which was a rail link through Malawi that connected the mine to the port of Nacala. However, even Moatize, which was a much larger operation, could not make a profit, in part because the railway lines are long and a prime target for Renamo rebels. Finally, in 2014, Rio Tinto threw in the towel. It sold its stake in Benga (and some undeveloped deposits) to International Coal Ventures of India for $50m. It also sold Riversdale’s Zululand Anthracite Colliery to Menar Holdings for an undisclosed sum. However, the Indian company also couldn’t make it work. In May 2016, International Coal Ventures suspended mining at Benga, with losses running at $7.5m/month. In January this year, The Financial Express of India reported it was planning to resume mining to take advantage of a surge in coking coal prices. Albanese resigned from Rio Tinto in 2013, after 30 years with the group, when it reported $14bn of write-downs, including that of Riversdale. Though the $3.5bn write-down on Riversdale was far smaller than the write-down on the Alcan Aluminium purchase, Rio chairman Jan du Plessis said the magnitude of the Riversdale write-downs on a relatively recent acquisition was unacceptable. Then, on October 17 this year, the SEC said it had filed charges in the Manhattan federal court against Rio Tinto, Albanese and Elliott for inflating the value of the Mozambican coal assets. The US regulator said that "as the project began to suffer one setback after another, resulting in the rapid decline of the value of the coal assets, they sought to hide or delay disclosure of the nature and extent of the adverse developments from Rio Tinto’s board of directors, audit committee, independent auditors, and investors." The SEC said Albanese and Elliott knew about adverse developments in Mozambique but went ahead with a $5.5bn fundraising from US investors without disclosing what was happening behind the scenes. "The SEC seeks permanent injunctions, return of allegedly ill-gotten gains plus interest, and civil penalties from all the defendants, and seeks to bar Albanese and Elliott from serving as public company officers or directors." John Meyer, analyst at SP Angel, says that having covered Rio Tinto for many years, he has seen it making prudent write-downs of assets regularly and does not consider it to be a fraudulent organisation. "We have to wonder why Rio Tinto didn’t go after (those who sold Riversdale to Rio) when they realised the coal resource was far smaller than it had believed and the coal quality was not so good," he says. "Rumours at the time suggested that a rival mining company had lobbied the Mozambican government in opposition to the barging concept, causing it to reject the proposal." Albanese resigned from Vedanta in August, saying he wanted to spend more time with his family. On October 17, the same day as the SEC announcement, Elliott said he would step down from Shell immediately. Neither Albanese nor Elliott responded to requests for comment. The only executive still laughing is the founder and one-time chairman of Riversdale, Michael O’Keefe, who originally sold the assets to Rio Tinto in 2011, and who also recently concluded a clever deal. He was once head of Glencore Australia, and is now chairman of ASX-listed Champion Iron. In December 2015, just as iron ore prices hit $38/t, Champion announced it had bought the Bloom Lake iron ore mine for just $8m. Bloom Lake’s owner, Cliffs, had paid $4.9bn for it. Iron ore prices are now about $60/t and Champion’s share price has soared from A16c to A$1.34. mathewsc@fm.co.za