On top of the almost daily political crises and rand volatility that have made decision making harder for SA businessmen over the past two years, mining company executives have also grappled with crises around their regulatory regime, safety incidents, wage negotiations and illegal mining. Speaking at last week’s Joburg Indaba, Lonmin CEO Ben Magara said he expected "chaos" to continue while Implats group executive Gerhard Potgieter said: "There’s a lot of red flags at the moment." The biggest talking point at the Joburg Indaba was the boycott of the opening dinner by the Chamber of Mines’ top executives to avoid sharing a platform with mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane. The chamber said that if its executives had attended, it would not have brought about any constructive dialogue. The disagreement between the industry and the minister on the third version of the mining charter is now before the courts. Asked if he would invest in SA mining stocks, Jamie Horvat, London-based manager of the M&G Global Basics Fund (£2.1bn) said: "Unfortunately SA is a no-go zone for us." He said for fund managers handling the after-tax savings of ordinary people, there were big concerns about governments that lacked a long-term sound economic plan and did not offer a fair and just regulatory environment with protection for property rights. Horvat said equity investors take more risk than any other stakeholder in the mining industry. Governments earn taxes, employees earn wages and bond holders earn interest on a secured investment, but shareholders, who put in most of the capital for development, have no certainty of returns. The comments from SA mining industry executives highlighted these risks. They said their first priority at present was watching new developments and responding to them as rapidly as possible. Phillip Barton, CEO of De Beers Consolidated Mines (DBCM), said executives could not spend enough time on long-term strategy because they were "fighting fires" every day. Magara said in this environment, he needed managers who were able to adapt continuously to change. Phillip Tobias, COO of new business at Harmony Gold Mining, said the company’s short-term strategy had to adapt to new circumstances all the time. For example, last year Harmony was considering putting its Hidden Valley mine in Papua New Guinea on care and maintenance but this year it has decided instead to invest more in it. But within risks there were sometimes opportunities, Tobias said. When the rand weakened to R16/dollar on Nenegate, Harmony locked in some of the surge in rand gold prices with short-term hedging, which paid off. In the midst of a shrinking gold price, Harmony could look at consolidation and realising synergies among its different operations and with neighbouring mines. Platinum executives have been harder hit by the nine-year downturn in prices and labour unrest than any other sector. In 2014 they endured a five-month strike on mines around Rustenburg over wage increases and their concessions to above-inflation demands have been followed by thousands of retrenchments over the past three years. "Today cash is king, so that when prices turn around we have the cash to take advantage of opportunities," Magara said. "We have to teach our stakeholders they need to take short-term pain for long-term gain". Implats’s Potgieter said platinum companies have to be aware of risks all the time and adapt their strategies to counter them but at the same time keep in mind 10-year goals and try to anticipate the direction of platinum demand. Chris Griffith, CEO of Anglo American Platinum, said one thing that was within the platinum industry’s control, unlike other precious metals producers, was to invest in marketing to grow demand. In the past couple of months it seemed government was listening and could help by issuing platinum coins. Barton said marketing was particularly important in the diamond industry. De Beers’ long-term strategy was to increase consumers’ desire for diamonds. But the luxury goods market was experiencing continuous volatility. He said DBCM management in all its jurisdictions — SA, Botswana, Canada — spent a lot of time on partnerships and relationships, on safety and on motivating employees. Executives said SA’s mining sector had some enduring strengths. ARM CEO Mike Schmidt identified the quality of local orebodies while Mike Teke, chairman of Masimong, identified SA’s strong infrastructure and expertise. Charles Walters, CEO of Assore, said SA needed to focus on matters within its control, in particular its global cost competitiveness, and this should not only be a priority for the mining industry but also for Eskom, Transnet Rail and Transnet Ports, in the services they provide to the industry. Schmidt said a lot of SA’s resources were still lying in narrow tabular deposits and the application of innovation and talent to mechanisation would help to unlock them. The Joburg Indaba audience, representing largely mining managers and investors, indicated in a poll they thought the most exciting opportunity for SA’s mines lay in mechanisation and modernisation. They also believed mining executives’ first priority should be to deliver inclusive economic growth.